INT: January 15, 1996, Frank Shurman. Interviewer Susan London. Deerfield, Illinois, United States of America, in English. Susan London, L-O-N-D-O-N. It's January 15, 1996. I'm conducting an interview with Frank Shurman in Deerfield, Illinois, United States of America. Would you please tell us your name? 

FS: My name is Frank Shurman. 

INT: And spell it for us, please. 

FS: S-H-U-R-M-A-N. 

INT: And what was your name at birth? 

FS: Fritz Schurmann. And it was spelled S-C-H-U-- umlaut-- R-M-A-N-N. 

INT: Did you have any nicknames? 

FS: No. 

INT: And what was your birth date? 

FS: 8th of January 1915. 

INT: And how old are you now? 

FS: 81. 

INT: And where were you born? 

FS: In Hildsheim, Germany. 

INT: Could spell the city? 

FS: H-I-L-D-S-H-E-I-M. [BACKGROUND NOISE] 

INT: Would you please describe what your life was like before the occupation? 

FS: We lived in a town of about 75,000, an old, old city with a 1,000-year history. And we were-- lived in a middle-upper-class neighborhood in a beautiful home, three-story home with a beautiful garden outside of the walls of the old city, and we lived a very comfortable life. We had a home, and as long as I can remember we always had kinder fraulein, a nanny and a maid. And every four weeks a wash-woman would come and do the big laundry and the ironing lady would come and do the ironing. And my father was [BACKGROUND NOISE] a very successful and very capable and very creative man in the men's fashion industry and respected as one of the leaders in this industry. And-- were were-- we had friends. Our social life was part of our assimilated life. We had many Jewish friends, but just as many Christian friends. And my father was somewhere on the city council to supervise the [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] is like so that very old buildings would not be destroyed by people who wanted to do something to them. And as I look back, my father was not just a highly respected man, but a very proud man who always made it very clear to everyone that he did what he did as a Jew, but as a German Jew and as a German. 

INT: What did that mean? 

FS: If somebody would have asked me in 19-- before Hitler came to power, if some-- and maybe even after Hitler came to power, if somebody would have asked me, what's your nationality? I would-- I would have answered without any hesitation, I'm a German. And if you would have asked me for my religion, I would have said, I'm a Jew. And I went to-- after I became six years old I went to a [NON-ENGLISH], which was the Jewish primary school across the street from our synagogue. We had-- it was a two class-- classroom school, but a very, very good school. So good that I remember that two Christian students attended the school because their parents wanted them to get the education that Lehrer Stern, our teacher, and Lehrer Bach would give us. I went to that school. We were-- we had to go for four years to primary school. And there was an exception made. If you had particularly good grades, you could finish after three years. And after three years, you would take an exam to go into the school that my parents had picked for me, Gymnasium [? Josefino. ?] A gymnasium was a school that prepared you-- it was really a combination of-- of high school and junior college. And you had to pass a very tough examination in order to be admitted to the school. And I remember that friend of mine who had gone with me to this Jewish primary school, Hans Pallenbaum, and I, were of 78 students accepted, the two who made the top grades. And I was told later on, when I didn't perform as well as they-- as those teachers had expected, that there were two teachers of two different classes who had fought for these two Jewish boys to get them in their class because they had high expectations, and I didn't fulfill those high expectations. I went to the school, and it was always understood, and again probably part of the German background, that I would someday be trained and-- professionally trained to take over the very successful firm of my father. We had a firm with 50 coat-makers and two designers. And my father often missed in his own professional training that he hadn't gotten the technical background that he felt was missing in his own background. And therefore it was always understood that someday I would learn-- before I would take over, I would learn tailoring and designing and be sent to England to some weaving school or to some school-- the people who made the cloth for our fine custom suits, and be trained there so that I would have a complete, well-rounded background. And when I was 12 years old, I think it was the year before my bar mitzvah, my father came to the fantastic-- came up with a fantastic idea that-- told me that he would let me work in his workshop, and one of his tailors would teach me the basics of tailoring if I would bring up my Latin grades. And I went a couple of times. It sounded very exciting. But after three or four or five times, I came to the conclusion that it was much easier to let my Latin grades go down if it meant that I wouldn't have to go into this ridiculous tailor training, which was partly part of my youthful arrogance and partly of my snobbism that was connected with this. Because I never could quite understand why I had to be-- become a worker and be trained as a tailor before taking over the management of my father's firm. But he insisted on it and that was understood. And after I left school, I was put into an apprenticeship program with a schneidermeister, with a master tailor, who had many, many years ago had books from my father and was very, very proud that Willy Schurmann came to him to ask him to take his son under his wings. And-- 

INT: How old were  you? 

FS: I was at that time 17. And it was an amazing transition for me coming from this kind of snobbish school and going to be for-- at 7 o'clock every morning sit on the table with crossed legs and be taught by this man whose German was grammatically not quite correct. He was an uneducated man, at least I thought by my standards. But after a while he taught me that my [LATIN], and the fact that I knew how to say [LATIN] in Latin didn't mean a damn thing to him. And that I was really a dummkopf, that I was a stupid boy who couldn't be taught as easily as he thought he could teach me. But he finally convinced me that I set my mind to it and I spent two years with him. And that was-- the-- the apprentice system was, in the retrospect today, I feel a very, very wise system. And it taught us not only to learn the technique of a craft, but also become aware of the social problems connected with it. I would live in this magnificent home, and every morning I would go into this poor neighborhood and sit on the table together with Schneidermeister Hemholdt and learned how-- the very basic things, how to make a pair-- pair of trousers. And it took me many, many months before I even was half productive. And he put lots of his own effort into it. And then after two years, it was-- had been agreed with him and my father that after two years I would be sent to school in Dreisen, the European Fashion Academy, where I would then be trained to complete the technical training that I had gotten. And by this time it was 1933. In fact, I left on the 1st of April 1933. I left Hildsheim for Dreisen, and that was the day of the boycott day. That was the first widely anti-Semitic activity by the Nazis, where every store, every law practice, every medical practice was boycotted by having storm troopers standing at the entrance and discouraging people from going into a medical practice, to this Jewish doctor, or going into our store, or other stores that were Jewishly owned. And I remember that my father and mother both were very happy that I would not be home on that day, not realizing that by the time I got to Dreisen all by myself and alone that I saw it in Dreisen. And that was the beginning. 

INT: What was that like to experience that? 

FS: I think it was the beginning when I started to realize that the-- we had made for-- ever since Hitler came to power on the 30th of January 1933, we had made it about-- in wishful thinking. And I remember my father saying, you know, let this idiot show them how he can run the country. And he will not be able to, and therefore in a couple of months, it will be all over. And he will be kicked out by the people that behind him and the big industrialists who were right-wing industrialists, and-- and they will not last. Well, when I came to Dreisen and saw what he had done on the main street in Dreisen, which at that-- up to that point until it was destroyed during the war, was one of the most beautiful cities in Germany. And-- and I had to-- to start in a workshop where there was one other Jew, the son of a rabbi-- Joe De Haas was his name-- who learned tailoring. You know, which was at that time very, very common that people left them-- their law studies and became carpenters or left their academic studies and became craftsman in anticipation of immigration, on leaving Germany. And therefore, my being-- being a craftsman and being a skilled tailor became much more fashionable, as it had been when I first started out. Many, many of my friends envied me for the skill that I had accumulated in the meantime. 

INT: Why was there the consideration by people that they might have to emigrate? 

FS: [SIGHS] It depended a little bit on your whole attitude, I think. In our house, it was always taken for granted that we would sit this out, that ultimately Hitler would fall. And as I look back, and have over many, many years thought about this and tried to analyze it and said, what made us so stubborn and so insensitive to the political realities of this time? I think it was a little bit our family lived since 1650 in Germany. And there was no doubt in our mind here was this-- this Bohemian man with a guttural accent-- Hitler didn't speak good German-- and we couldn't imagine that this charlatan could convince a people like the Germans to be their leader. And it took us many years to-- to become adjusted to these new realities. While other friends of ours who were more flexible and more mobile-- physically and emotional-- said, this is too ridiculous. We pack and leave. We saw at that time some very interesting things happening. We saw people who had never known that they were Jewish suddenly became not Jews-- Jews but became fanatic Zionists because they felt that there was-- their-- their lack or their-- their being-- being a secular Jew, it was much easier for them to become a Zionist than to become a religious Jew. And many of them, in the first months or in the first year of the Hitler came to power, left Germany and went to, at that time, Palestine. And many of them left while they were still able to take their money out and left and went to South America or went to America. And we stuck it out. 

INT: What do you feel they were responding to that you were not? Were you seeing what they were responding to or was it--? 

FS: I think they were-- I think they were much more realistic. We called it at that time much more pessimistic than we were. But they were much more realistic than we were. And we made them wishful thinking for a long, long time. And all of this was a little bit emphasized by the fact that in September 1933-- so that is about nine months after Hitler came to power-- we got one of the coveted awards for one of the fashion creations that we sent to Berlin. And it was, at that time, it was almost unbelievable that a Jewish firm would be so rewarded. And it was at the same time-- it was not only an uplift for our own spirits, you know, we said, you know, you see, they are not all Nazis. And-- and-- and the people who gave us this award were not Jewish. And they knew that we were Jewish and they were somehow giving this award in spite of that tendency that existed that time. And it gave us-- it gave us fuel for the things-- for the kind of engine we wanted to run. We wanted to believe that this was not going to last, and we were encouraged by this, by many of our Christian friends who would come to us and say, don't give in. This cannot last, until it was too late. 

INT: Did you know any people who supported Nazis? 

FS: Yeah. Oh, yes, yes, indeed. You couldn't have helped it. You know, we-- we lived in this town, in this small town, relatively small town, even though, you know, the town of 75,000 in those days, we had our own theater. And we had our own opera. It was not like a small town in America. I had gone to-- as I mentioned before, I had gone to this gymnasium was a Catholic school was under the sponsorship of the bishop of Hildesheim. And we would get encouragement from our teachers who were priests, who-- and by the very fact that they were priests were basically anti-Nazis. And we would be talked to, and-- and-- and I was once called in by a man who lived near the cathedral. Our school was an adjunct to the cathedral, and this man was professor Konrad Agermussen, who had written a book, Germandom and Christendom. It was a book fighting the myth of the 20th century, which was the Nazi Bible. And it took an unbelievable amount of courage for him to do this, risking his future, his physical future. And one day, one of our workers was his cousin, Franz Kemner. And Franz Kemner asked me one day that Dr. Agermussen had asked him, would I come to see him? And I went to his study and saw him. And he sat me down in his book-lined library and said to me, you know, you cannot leave. Your parents should not leave. We have to keep the balance between evil and good. And if all of you leave, we are left with evil and the majority has to be-- has to be a majority of good people. And he tried to use his influence to encourage our staying. 

INT: When was this? 

FS: 1936. And let me say that in-- in-- after-- after Buchenwald, he asked me again to come and see him. And I sat in his book-lined study, and he said to me this time, Fritz, I was all wrong. Get out, and get out as fast as you can while you still can. And he asked me would I tell him some of the details of what I had seen in the concentration camp? And even though I had signed all kinds of papers before I left Buchenwald-- I'm jumping a little bit ahead of my story-- that I would never talk about what I had seen there, I sat there with Dr. Agermussen and told him every little detail about what I had experienced. And after I was all through, he looked at me and said, the reason that I was interested in this, I have the feeling that some day I will go to a concentration camp. And indeed he did. So-- in-- 

INT: What was it like when you were in contact with people who were in support of the Nazis before the war? 

FS: They-- they would say to you, look, the old cliche, we don't mean you, but there are certainly some Jews who have done things that were wrong and you have to suffer. Being innocent, you have to suffer with the ones who are-- who have been guilty. And their guilt consisted, and their-- from their point of view, that during the Depression that-- and I'm quoting them now-- the Jews had taken advantage of their economic situation and had bought during the ridiculous inflation-- you know there was an inflation where-- where people didn't figure in millions but in billions. They were paid in billions. And when in 1927, '28-- no, no earlier-- 1923, '24, '25-- when people were paid as workers, they would leave the moment after they were paid and run to-- to the grocery store so that they could then buy grocery before the money was worthless the next day. And it was an unbelievable, unbelievable insecure situation, which many people feel today was the fodder for Hitler to-- to utilize this and say to the Germans, is that really what you want? Or do you want me to come in and correct all this? 

INT: When was this? 

FS: In the beginning of '39. We were, in the meantime, we were out of business. And we were, just he and I, sitting in his office. And he looked at me. And he said, Mr. Shurman, I give you my word of honor, which was the ultimate that somebody could give, much better than a legal paper, that it will never leave these four walls. And I always was disgusted with the lack of moral courage of Germans. And I didn't want to commit the same sin. And I said to myself, I'm taking the chance. And I sat there and told Mr. Wendel everything about Buchenwald. And his face-- and I still see him-- his face got redder and redder. And he got very excited. And while I was talking to him, I saw that he had a pin in his lapel that said FMSS, which was [? Furthering ?] Member of the SS. And I, while I was talking to him, I wasn't quite sure if my father would have agreed with my youthful foolishness of trusting somebody like Mr. Wendel. 

INT: What did the FM mean? 

FS: FM means a paying, a paying member. He couldn't-- he was too old to be a member of the SS. So he was-- 

INT: A supporting member. 

FS: Supporting member. And he listened, and listened very carefully. He didn't ask any questions. And I just kept on telling him. And after I was through, he looked at me. And he said, I'm deeply ashamed to be a German. And he reached for the pin and pulled the pin off his lapel and threw it in his wastebasket. And it was an unbelievable, emotional experience for both of us. He survived the war. And Margie and I and my children have visited him later on after the war. And he reminded me of this coincident, of this situation, when I helped to start to see what Hitler was all about. And you also asked before, what made us not see the upcoming or the oncoming danger? Thus, thought of my sister Edith, got married to Egon Rehfeld in 1937. Egon's father was the president of our congregation. And as their wedding present in June, 1937, they got a trip to America. And they came to Atlantic City and stayed in Atlantic City on their honeymoon. Now, anybody in his right mind in 1937, even I, would have at least put out my feelers and say, you know, what is a America all about? Isn't this some day a place that I better find out and make my contacts now, instead of being on a honeymoon and lying on the beach in Atlantic City? They came back-- Edith with her jewels-- came back to Hildesheim. And Edith at that time-- she was very young, she was 19 years old-- told her father-in-law, her new father-in law, that maybe they had  made a mistake. Maybe they should have looked around while they were in America. And Alex Rehfeld, the patriarch of the family, looked at my sister and said, you ungrateful child. I have taken care of you, your children, and children's children. And you don't ever have to worry of going to America. That was in 1937. A year later, when he was on his way to Buchenwald and after he came out of Buchenwald, he  had changed his tune a little bit and wasn't quite sure if the God that he had served for so many years as the head of the congregation was really alive and if he could really trust him. And he thought of a possibility of going, packing up the next day and going to Shanghai. Shanghai was the only place where people could go without visa. And many of them went. This is-- gives you a little bit of a cliche of what went on, particularly among the well-situated and integrated members of German Jews. I was at that time, in '37, I was still, I was still hoping that, that it would all blow up and that we could continue. But little by little, I started to realize that I better concentrated on my education, on my technical education, not with the view that someday I would take over my father's firm, but so that I use this hard come by technical skill and develop it so that some day, if I would have to leave Germany without a penny, that I would be able to support myself. 

INT: Did you consider leaving Germany at that time when you were thinking about the future possibility of leaving? Did you think about leaving then? 

FS: No, not yet. And then things started to move fast. You know, Hitler had come-- 

INT: Before we go into that. If we could back up a little? 

FS: Yeah. 

INT: What was your experience of anti-Semitism before the Nazis, before you even heard the term Nazi or National Socialist? 

FS: There were-- you know, there was a political turmoil in Germany. It was a fight between-- we, in the first place, had this ridiculous system of multi, multi, multi parties. We had, at that point, we had maybe 25 political parties. And from the center in the Democratic Party and the Social Democrats, you had the extremes of the, of the Nazis on one side and the communists on the other side. And those with the two strongest parties besides the Social Democrats. 

INT: And when was this? 

FS: In, in 1930-- in 1919, in 1929, I remember I was on my way to school. And they won, the Nazis won their first tremendous victory in the Reichstag. But then things calmed down. And, and the economic situation became a little better. And again, the wishful thinkers thought maybe Hitler has lost the, the, the thing that moved him ahead by, by the wisdom of the democratic government. And therefore, maybe it will not happen. 

INT: Prior to the Nazis, did you experience anti-Semitism in your hometown as a child? 

FS: Yeah, I think I experienced the, the, the primitive anti-Semitism of, of, of the anti-social or asocial elements in our society, in German society. And I say in our society. There were kids when I was 14, 15 years old who used to call me a, a Jew or dirty Jew. And I went at that time, I joined, I joined in a boxing society, a boxing club, in order to learn how to physically defend myself against the attacks of those. 

INT: Had you received physical attacks? 

FS: Pardon me? 

INT: Had you received physical attacks? 

FS: Mhm. But, but it was part of, of growing up. You know, if, if, if I wouldn't have been a Jew, they would have called me a dirty Catholic, you know. But other words, these were elements that would have picked on anybody that they felt inferior to. But it was not an, it was not a destructive force in my life. In fact, anti-Semitism was never a destructive force in my life. I think that it was, in many ways, by turning it around, in many, many ways a positive force. I think I tried much harder to be a better human being and to be a more skilled human being because of the threat of anti-Semitism. And I have said sometimes in retrospect, many years later, after Buchenwald, said that I would never be able to go through it again. But I wouldn't have sold the experience I had in Buchenwald for any money, because I thought it gave me a new standard of survival. It gave me a new test. And I remember when, later on, when I went into  the American Arm and I was in basic training, and there were guys who were bitching about the toughness of our basic training. And I was laughing inside. And I thought, little do they know. And had new, I had learned a minimum of survival, which they had never experienced. They were spoiled kids. And I had been taught the hard way this lesson that I think stayed with me all through my life. [PAUSES FOR 13 SECONDS] In, in, when you, when you asked me before, did I experience anti-Semitism, in, in August, 1934, after I had passed my final examinations and graduated-- by the way, with a certificate of excellence from the European Fashion Academy-- was the only student there and the only Jew who got this, some Nazis who were in our workshop and tried to sabotage me any-- in many, many different ways-- did not get it. And this is a little bit fitting in with what I said just a few moments ago. But I, I got a job in Hamburg with one of the fine tailoring firms in Hamburg, [? Christian ?] [? Ohlmeyer. ?] And I started with them on the first of August, 1934. And the business manager of this firm was a Nazi, a uniformed Nazi. And the designer I worked for was an SS  man. Piotrowski was his name. We used to call him Pios. And Piotrowski, after I started there, and I went to Mr. [? Ohlmeyer-- ?] his name was [? Christian ?] [? Ohlmeyer, ?] who was a friend of my father. And I got this job partly because of this interrelationship between people who own businesses. And, And I went to Mr. [? Ohlmeyer ?] and said, you know, I forgot, when I first met you, I forgot to tell you that I'm a Jew. He said, I knew that. He said, you know-- I said, well, I thought you should know that. And he said, well, you know, he said, I wouldn't necessarily go into the workshop and say what you just told me. They don't have to know it. And I said, Mr. [? Ohlmeyter, ?] I will not go and say I am a Jew. But I will never deny it. And I remember that a couple of-- maybe two months after I started there, and in the meantime, we were in the workshop. We were grouped together, together with this designer, Piotrowski. And one day, Piotrowski came back to the workshop. And he had tried on a suit on the man who was a South American of an old patrician importing/exporting family in Hamburg. And he was dark skinned and dark haired. And he didn't like what Piotrowski tried on him. And Piotrowski was full of anger when he came back into the shop. And he took the garment and threw it in the corner. And he said, that damn Jew. I couldn't satisfy him. And, and I looked at Piotrowski. And by that time, we had met many, many times. And we knew each other. And we used to walk home together. And I said to him, Pios, he is, he is not Jewish. He said, of course he's a Jew. I said, no he isn't. He's, he's a South American. I said, I happen to know the family. He is  not Jewish. He said, well, what difference does it make? Why do you defend him? I said, I'm not defending him. I'm defending myself. I said, I'm Jewish. And he looked at me and said, you are not. I said, I'm not the type of Jew that you see in the Sturmer, which was the, the wildest, almost pornographic, antisemitic newspaper published by Julius Streicher. And I said, he said, I know a Jew when I see one. I said, do you really? I said, well, you saw me. And you met me eight weeks ago. And you never discovered that I was Jewish until I told you. And I said, when you think of the Olympic games, there is a woman, Helene Mayer, who is, won the gold medal in fencing. He said, don't tell me she's Jewish. I said, she's Jewish. I said, the things that you are being taught are not quite right. Don't you see it? And I would take this attitude wherever I could. And Pios and I got along the whole period I was in Hamburg working for him. And it was somehow the same kind of philosophy that made me tell Mr. Wendel about my experiences in Buchenwald. 

INT: At any point during the '30s, did you start experiencing fear of what was happening around you? 

FS: I think I experienced deep fear, tremendous fear, when the Gestapo came on the 9th of November-- the night from the 9th or the 10th of November-- and arrested us. 

INT: What year was that? 

FS: 1938. That was Kristallnacht. But I would like to go back for a moment, before I get to Kristallnacht. By, in May, 1938, we were still in business. We had, at one of the most prominent corners in downtown Hildesheim, there was this store with six large windows, [INAUDIBLE] windows, and a business that had flourished. The Nazis became kind of desperate. And they had a wonderful way of ultimately finding a way of killing you economically. And one day, they, in May 1938, they came into my father's office. And they confiscated, under some pretext, the steel files with all, with all the files and cards of our customers. And my father told them that it was against his ethical concepts that there was a-- just like a physician would not talk and give the facts, that, that an ethical merchant would not reveal these facts. And they made it very clear to him that if he would refuse to turn those files over to him, that he would be under arrest and that our organization would be closed as of this moment. And my father had no choice. And they took the steel files. And about four days later-- and I have in my papers there a copy-- the Gestapo sent a letter to every one of our customers with a complete breakdown of what they had bought. And if they felt that they had been overcharged, to contact the undersigned, Dr. [? Mercantaler, ?] who would then take care of the, of the over-pricing policies that this Jewish firm has been, has been suspected for, for quite a while. But there were-- just like we had during the war here in America, we had the OPA, the Office of Price Control. That same thing existed in Germany. And there was not a pin in our store that was over-priced. We were pope-ier than the Pope in, in, in sticking to the-- knowing that that's all. But doing, by sending this letter out, first of all, appealing to the lowest instincts in customers-- you know, if somebody owed us $1,000, my gosh, if I say, maybe I can get rid of this debt. The fantastic thing was not one of our customers complained about our, of having been over-priced. But we knew then that this was the death knell and that we had to throw the towel in. And, and my father-- and when I looked back, in, in a spirit of complete straightforwardness and honesty, went, after three days after these letters were mailed, went to the Gestapo. I went with him. He asked me to go with him. And we sat down with Inspector [? Zichting. ?] Inspector [? Zichting ?] was the head of the Gestapo in Hildesheim. And my father asked him, could we have the files back? And he said, yes, you can. And my father looked at [? Zichting ?] and said to him, Herr Inspektor, after seeing these files, you will now understand why I felt I had to protect the names of my customers. And [? Zichting ?] looked the other way. I didn't know at that time why my father said that. Among the files was [? Zichting's ?] father-in-law. And by the time we got the files back, [? Zichting's ?] father-in-law's file was gone. It was this kind of lack of fear that I would constantly see in my father, I was somehow brought up with that, that you don't cave in in the, in the light of injustice and so on. But that was then we asked for permission to liquidate our business. And it was liquidated. 

INT: What was that like? What did you do to liquidate your business at that time? 

FS: That picture, that picture was taken two days before the liquidation sale started. And since we had carried very exclusive lines, and you know, like Burberry, and so on, we could not have windows decorated with the, with prices to entice people to come in. My father had the idea. And he asked our window trimmer to trim the most beautiful windows he had ever trimmed. We used to have windows by color. There was a brown window and a blue window. And, and he said, and we will not have any prices on the merchandise, because people trust us. They trust us for our integrity and honesty. And we will not try to impress them with prices, because even, even with our prices, we couldn't entice people who wanted bargains. And that is how then the liquidation sale started. 
INT: What was it like when some of your friends started turning to the Nazi cause? 

FS: It was disappointing. But at the same time, having watched the political situation in Germany and the economic situation in Germany, I often try to ask myself, if I was not Jewish, would I be tempted by this Hamelin pipe-- 

INT: Pied Piper of Hamelin? 

FS: Pied Piper. Would I have caved in and said, you know, maybe-- maybe I would have been a Nazi, too. And-- and of course, I thought that at the time-- before the unbelievable criminal activities the Nazis started. You know, I would have said at-- at the time when he moved in, and he built autobahn, and he reduced the unemployment, and he rejuvenated the economic situation in Germany-- and-- 

INT: At that point, had you experienced any anti-Semitism that you would relate to the Nazis being in power? [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] 

FS: I never-- I never-- with the exception of the anti-Semitism that I referred to at the European Fashion Academy. There were Nazis in my group there, in my class, who made it tough. But fortunately, I think in all of this time, I was old enough or I was maybe mature enough that I could evaluate these things for what they really were. And maybe-- 

INT: What was that? What were they really? 

FS: That-- that here with these primitive souls who didn't know what anti-Semitism was all about and why they were anti-Semites or why they were Nazis. And let me go back quite a bit. In 1934-- in 1933 and '34, when we were in Dresden, I belonged to a youth group. And we came up with an idea-- I thought at that time was a fantastic idea. Instead of having the yellow spot put on us as a sign of-- of shame, we developed a medal that was a yellow circle. And for those who excelled in our youth group would get this yellow spot as an award. And we would say to them, wear it with pride. They cannot defame us, and they cannot degrade us unless we degrade ourselves. And it was, at that time, I thought, a kind of terrific morale booster for us. And maybe this attitude toward the yellow [NON-ENGLISH], that we turned it into a positive-- was a reflection of our youthful idealism, our naivete, or whatever. But it helped us. And I think we became more mature faster through these pressures that were working on us. Until they-- and-- and as I look back and try to answer your question, I did not ever suffer from unbearable anti-Semitism. But when-- when this thing happened to us in-- in May 1938, and we liquidated our downtown location, and took our workshop into our home and continued to-- continued our custom-made-- and had one designer and had maybe 15 loyal workers that stayed with us. And-- 

INT: Were these people Jewish? 

FS: No. None. We had among those only one Nazi. [LAUGHS] Among-- among the 50 coat-makers, we had only one that we knew was a Nazi. I believe he was from Czechoslovakia. And he couldn't speak German. [LAUGHS] But he always talked about the-- in-- in his funny dialect, that the Germans cannot have their own Fuhrer. They have to bring him from Czechoslovakia. You know, he felt there was a bond between him and-- and Hitler. He was not made very, very welcome and happy in our workshop. All the other workers somehow had a distance. 

INT: What happened as 1938 progressed after May? 

FS: So in-- in-- in-- in-- in the summer of 1938, I started to do some very serious soul-- soul-searching and-- and thinking of how we could get out of this dead-end street. And one day, my brother-in-law, the fellow who had gone to Atlantic City on his honeymoon-- a brother-in-law that I was not particularly fond of-- told me facetiously that his father's-- his-- his father had a chauffeur who drove him in a very elegant limousine all over the-- all over Germany. There were-- and this chauffeur had gotten a visit from a friend of his who was driving very wealthy American with her three daughters through Europe. And he had stopped in Hildesheim to say hello to Julius, this chauffeur. And my brother-in-law, who was teasing me at the same time about my consistent refusal of thinking in terms of emigration, but saw this change in me, and said, I'll give you a tip. Why don't you marry one of these girls that came yesterday with this American woman? And that's how you can get to America. Because we didn't have any relatives in America. We didn't have any contacts here. And I didn't know how I could possibly. And-- and he was sarcastic when he said it to me. And I turned-- again, turned this negative into a positive. And said, you know? Let me see. Where do they go from here? And they went to the Harz Mountains where I used to go skiing, in Braunlage. And I called every hotel in Braunlage. And all-- all I knew-- all I knew was the name of the chauffeur, not the people-- not the lady. And I finally found the hotel. They said, yeah. They left this morning. They went back to Berlin. They're on their way to Berlin. And I sat down. And I wrote a letter to Otto Schtenzel, this German chauffeur who was driving them, and said to him, you know us. You know our problem. I wonder if you can help me. Can you make any contact with this lady that you've been driving around? And I would like to talk to her. And I mailed that letter on a Thursday. And on Sunday afternoon, we were sitting at-- on our veranda of our garden, had had kaffee und kuchen, and-- coffee and cake. And the telephone rang. And Otto Schtenzel was on the phone. And Otto Schtenzel said, Herr Shurrman, I got your letter. I talked to Lady Hamilton. He called her always Lady Hamilton. This was the first I knew her name. I talked to her. And she's willing to see you. There's only one problem. He said, today is Sunday. Tomorrow night, Monday, they are driving to-- taking the train to Bremen, and sailing back to the United States. So the only time she can see you is tomorrow at 1 o'clock. And I said, I'll be there. And I-- at that time, I went to my father and asked my father for his car and told him why I wanted to go to Berlin. It was about three-hour drive from-- and my father, who was very wise of the-- he always said-- the ways of the world, looked at me. And he said, you are a utopian dreamer. He said, you will never get your feet on terra firma. And what a ridiculous idea, to go to Berlin, to talk to a woman-- what do you want to ask her for? I said, I want to ask her if she would be willing to help me. Or if she has Jewish friends in America who would be willing to help me. Well, he gave me his car. And he-- but he told me at the same time, he said, if you want them to Berlin, don't use such ridiculous excuses. And so my brother-in-law and my sister and my other sister-- both of my sisters-- and I got into the car early the next morning. Because I had called Schtenzel and asked him if he could have lunch with us before I would see this lady. Because I thought he could give me a little bit of a profile so that I would know what this is all about. Because I was aware of the chemistry of personality. And I didn't know-- you know, my English was poor. And I didn't know if I would get my message across. And if I would know a little bit more about her-- so we went. He agreed. And we had lunch at the Kaiserhof, a very nice hotel in Berlin. And he told us at that time that here was this lady-- obviously a very wealthy lady-- from Wisconsin with her three daughters. And they had traveled for three months, in Switzerland and all over Europe. And-- And she was of German descent. And they had visited an uncle of hers who was a retired German general in Munich. So he as one German about, said to me, let me warn you. I don't know how much you can trust her. Because she's of German descent, said the German. And with this information, we went to the Eden Hotel, one of the most elegant hotels in Berlin. And went to the desk. And I asked for her. And she asked us to come up in the elevator. And we went up in the elevator. And-- and I was kind of uptight. I realized that this was a responsibility that if I would fail in this mission, I would have a tough time to live the rest of my life. And I-- I somehow hoped and prayed that I would get my message across. And when the elevator door opened, here was this-- you know, we Europeans had-- had these certain concepts of Americans. And they all looked like Marlene Dietrich and so on. And here was this kind of heavyset woman standing there. And I apologized. Introduced my sister and my brother-in-law and apologized for this peculiar way that I asked for this appointment. And she looked at me. And she said, we have been long enough in Germany. I know how things are for you. And you have my sympathy. And then we-- she asked us to go into the reading room. We went into the reading room. Like many of the elegant hotels would have, all the papers of the world hanging there. And-- and then I looked around to see if we were alone. And she picked up on that. And she said, you know, we have been long enough in Germany. I understand this look. If you feel uncomfortable here, we can go to my room. I said, no. This is fine. So we sat down. And I somehow had the feeling, by sizing her up, that she was a kind of straightforward, no small talk, let's get down and talk tachlis. And-- although I'm sure she didn't know what tachlis was. She-- I said to her-- When she said, what can I do for you, I said I feel that we have reached the point where we have tried for years and years to see if we could survive here. And I've come to the conclusion, we can't. And we have to try to find somebody who can sponsor us. And I wondered if you had Jewish friends in America, and you could interest them in us. She had in the meantime-- she had done something beautifully. She said, you know, I understand German. My German is very poor. And you understand English, but your English is not up to snuff. Why don't you talk in German to me, and I'll talk to you in English? And one of my biggest fears just floated away. Now I could express myself well. And she started to-- after I told her if she had Jewish friends, she said, now let's-- let's assume I would know somebody who would do this. How about not-- but if you don't find the right job in America? What will happen? Would these people who sponsor you be financially responsible for you? And I said, yes. They will be for the first two years. And the only thing is, I would promise them, and I would give them my word of honor that I would never-- all I want to do is get to America, and find work, and support myself, and support my parents. And I said, you know, our problem is not to find the right job. Our problem is to be or not to be. And we were there for about 35 minutes talking to her. And it was-- and I showed her pictures of my parents and showed her. And the three daughters of Mrs. Hamilton came in. Because they started to get worried. What do-- what do these Germans want from their mother? And we were introduced to Ella, Mary Jane, and Margaret. Who-- Mary Jane had just graduated from Wellesley. And as the reward for having graduated from Wellesley, got this-- got this trip. The other two sisters came in on a free ride. So after this introduction, she asked a couple of more questions. And I think we were not longer than 50 minutes with her when she suddenly came to a conclusion. And she said, Mr. Shurman, give me the papers. I will sign the papers for you. I will sponsor you and your family. We sat there. We all started to cry. This was so unbelievable that after all the hate that we had experienced 1938, that somebody who'd just had met us would trust a face-- after I told her, yes, she will be financially responsible, but take my word for it, had come to the conclusion, yes, I want to help them. And we couldn't talk. And she said, as soon as I get back, I will start working on this. And I said to her, I said, you know, I don't have any papers. I was not prepared for this. But I cannot have any papers. It is up to you. You have to activate these things. And you have to sign affidavits which includes a copy of your income tax returns to show your financial responsibility and so on for the American consul to-- So she said, OK. I will start working on this as soon as I get back. And in a couple of months, you'll all be in America. So we said goodbye. We-- [CRYING] We went downstairs. And [INAUDIBLE]. [CRYING] And went friends of ours who originally had lived in Hildesheim and had moved to Berlin. And called my parents from there. And when I told my father [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] that I had affidavits, or the promise for affidavits, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] my father told me that this was too serious a thing to joke about. Because he didn't believe it. So-- we drove-- drove home. And the next day, I-- I went to our rabbi, who was a relatively new rabbi, young-- young rabbi, was a good friend of mine, Josef Schwartz, who later on ended up to be a rabbi in Benton Harbor, Michigan after going to Manila and being a prisoner of the Japanese. And asked him to write a letter to Mrs. Hamilton as a reference, you know. Because my father was skeptic. Told me, sure. Said, she's coming back home to America. And she will tell her husband what she has done here. And-- and he will say to her, are you completely meshuggah? Bring four people over here. You are responsible for them? So I sat down, and I wrote a letter thanking her and-- and sending her a book about my-- about Hildesheim, which was magnificent. It was one of the most beautiful cities. And she knew it. And so now I waited and waited. This was the 23rd of August, 1938. And the 23rd of September happened and nothing. We didn't hear. And my father, knowing [LAUGHS] the ways of the world, said, you know, forget about the whole thing. [INAUDIBLE] There was an old saying. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] [NON-ENGLISH] is when you have second thoughts about something. And said, she went back and-- so on the 6th of October, I got the letter-- the letter. It was a long, long, letter. And you will find the letter in my story that I wrote in memory of Mrs. Hamilton. The letter said that she came back. At first she was busy with getting her daughters ready for school, to go back to school. And-- but she told her husband of this experience. And she wanted to tell us that her husband was in full accord with her promise. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And on her way home, she had stopped-- after they got to New York, she had gone to Columbus, Ohio and stopped at friends of theirs. And [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] she said this friend had a big department store in Columbus. And I didn't know Columbus, Ohio. I didn't know Ohio. I didn't know-- I didn't know America. And I didn't know what-- what she was talking about when she talked about Columbus, Ohio and that her friend had a big department store there. And he said to her that if I would come here, and I couldn't find any other job, he would give me a job in his store. And I didn't know at that time that this friend was Herbert Lazarus of Lazarus Department Stores in Columbus, Ohio, who also owned Bloomingdale's and also owned Filene, and also owned Abraham & Straus, and so on and so on. And-- and Mrs. Lazarus, Hettie Weiler God bless her soul, was Mrs. Hamilton's roommate, class of 1914 at Wellesley. And I'm convinced-- I'm still convinced today, even though Mrs. Hamilton's daughters have denied it, that it was this friendship-- this lifelong friendship, very, very close friendship with this Jewish girl-- [CRYING] That opened her heart. [CRYING] Now. Come on. And-- I said in the story, which I wrote many, many years later in memory of Mrs. Hamilton, she was a unbelievable human being. And we were privileged to be her friend for 28 years. And she had the sensitivity and the-- she had respect for our sensitivities. And she did things that were so unbelievable. So that many, many, many years later, on our 50th-- 50th anniversary that I met Mrs. Hamilton-- Margie and I had inherited some money from an aunt of Margie's, who was a very, very favorite aunt of mine, another remarkable woman. And we went to our lawyer and set up a fund [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [CRYING] at Wellesley, [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] the Agusta Hamilton Fund for Jewish Studies [CRYING] at Wellesley. [CRYING] 
INT: What is it that happened immediately after? 

FS: I mailed the letter at midnight on the 9th of November. And I didn't have a very good night. I couldn't get to sleep. And at around 5 o'clock in the morning, there was a-- the doorbell rang. And there was a knock at the door. And I looked at my clock. And I couldn't believe anybody at 5 o'clock in the morning coming to our house. And I put my dressing gown on and went downstairs. And I said, who's there? And he said, 'Geheime Staatspolizei,' Gestapo, open the door. And outside were two SS men with a Gestapo agent whom I knew, to whom I had to go whenever I had meetings in my youth. I had to get his permission. So Inspector Hemmerling and these two SS men came into our house. Without any formal introduction or so, they just walked in and walked into my father's library and said that they were looking for arms and books, forbidden books and weapons. And the way they went about it, I knew this was nonsense. They were not looking. And they said, get your father down here. We have to talk to him. So I went upstairs in my parents' bedroom. And my mother had an ailing heart. And I didn't know how to prepare them. And-- but nevertheless, I told them the Gestapo was downstairs. And my parents came down. And they didn't do anything, didn't go through any-- didn't look for anything. And only later on did we find out that they were particularly human in our case because in other incidents, they had gone into houses and smashed the libraries and tore down the chandeliers, and so on. And nothing was touched. And one of the reasons was that one of the SS officers was the son-in-law of our next-door neighbor. And I think that he kept it under control. But he told us, nevertheless, that we should get dressed-- my father and I should get dressed-- and come with them to Gestapo headquarters for further interrogation. And I went upstairs. My father went upstairs. My father came into my room and said, we're not coming back. Get dressed very warm. And this time, his skepticism was justified. And I listened to him. And I put on my ski boots and my ski sweater. And those warm clothing. Maybe it saved my life after we got to Buchenwald. 

INT: How did you know that? How did he-- what made him suspect you weren't coming back? 

FS: Nothing, we had no-- we had no idea. We had no-- 

INT: Had other people-- 

FS: We had no idea. The only thing was both my father and I knew-- and maybe I should say this here-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] in the previous spring, one of our-- one of the good friends of my father, who was a lawyer, Catholic lawyer, had come to my father to say goodbye to him. And my father looked at him and said, what are you talking about? He said, I'm leaving Germany. Said, I cannot stay here. And then he told him that his law clerk had been on summer training in the SS and had been a guard in a concentration camp and had come back and told Franz [? Nilsen, ?] this lawyer, what he had seen, even though he was not supposed to. And Franz [? Nilsen ?] came to the conclusion that any country where this could happen, he didn't want to live in. And my father convinced him that he was pushing it a little bit too far and that he shouldn't. But when we ultimately were on our way to Buchenwald, my father said to me, he said, you know, Fritz, you and I are probably the only ones who know what we can look forward to if it is true what [? Nilsen ?] told us. So we went-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] my mother asked the-- those three gentlemen-- 'gentlemen' in quotation marks-- if she could fix breakfast for us, so that we wouldn't leave on an empty stomach. And they said, by the time breakfast time comes around, they will be home. But they forgot to tell her which day or month we would come home. And our car was parked in front of our house and was a new car. And they said, in order to get us home faster, we should take our car. And I was naive enough to sit behind the wheel. And he said, get in the back of the car. I drive the car, one of the SS men said. And it was the last time we saw the car. And we went to Gestapo headquarters. And on the way, as we got closer to Gestapo headquarters-- it was still dark-- we saw, like, ghosts, people, other people, friends of ours, on their way to Gestapo headquarters. And among them was a quite famous physician, who was a very famous ear, nose, and throat specialist, [GERMAN] Dr. Krebs, whose son later on won the Nobel Prize in biochemistry. And by this time, we knew it was not just us who were arrested. There was a mass action. And early in the morning, all of us were taken to the prison, and-- the local prison, and then lined up-- lined up outside the prison, 75 of us, to be taken on a march through the city, through the streets of our city. And across the street-- across the street from the police headquarters was the chamber of commerce. And there were people standing at the windows and kind of laughing, but not a happy laugh, kind of an embarrassed laugh seeing this sad little group of Jews down there. And that was probably, to the people up there, an anonymous group. They didn't know who they were. Except that among the people that were standing there, I saw a girl who used to be my partner in dancing school, a girl-- blond girl Margaret [INAUDIBLE], who looked out. And I stared at her. And I somehow think that there was a hypnosis that made our eyes meet. And the moment she discovered me, the group was not anonymous anymore. She saw somebody that she knew. And she stopped laughing. And she turned around and walked away. I never saw her again. And I thought it was one of the symbolic, very, very interesting things, that you can talk about 'the Jews,' but the moment you know somebody specifically in there, it becomes intolerable for the viewer. And we were taken then-- now, marched through the streets. And the SS had unlocked their guns. And we were told that any attempt to move out of line without any warning, we would be shot. And we were taken around the streets of our city. And there were people standing on the sidewalks, and I think some of them in horror, looking at this scenario. And when we finally moved down on the street, there was a whisper among us, that only was a rumor we couldn't believe. But the direction that this march took, it looked like we were going to our synagogue. And little by little, we got close enough that we could smell the burn. And we were taken around our burning synagogue, marched around the burning synagogue. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the SS-- or the SR, whoever it was-- had taken a Torah roll out and rolled it out on the street and made us march across the Torah rolls. And we were then taken-- after this march de triomphe, we were taken back. And we were split up because we were too many to be taken to one prison. We were taken to two different prisons. In the middle of the next night, we were loaded on open trucks. 

INT: You're still with your father at this point? 

FS: Pardon me? 

INT: Are you still with your father at this point? 

FS: Yeah, I was still with my father. In fact, there's another, if I can-- but my-- so we went to-- we were loaded on open trucks and taken in the November night. Many of them in-- only in their pajamas with an overcoat over it, without being dressed properly. We were taken [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] away from Hildesheim. We didn't know where we were going. We were going to Hanover. And in Hanover, there was a special train. And we were loaded on the special train. And on this special train were Jews from surrounding villages near Hanover, among them from Pattensen, the birthplace of my father. And my uncle, with his two sons, were also on the train. In the-- while we were on the train-- and still didn't know yet where we were going, and one of the worst punishments and greatest fear was this uncertainty. You know, nobody told you. You didn't get an itinerary. And the sun was rising over the city. That was well known to us. And we somehow felt maybe we never see the city again. And a friend of my father-- and I don't know how he got it in-- had a book, Gone With the Wind, that he carried in-- with him. And my father tore the cover page out of the Gone With the Wind and converted it into a postcard and wrote a postcard to my mother-- and lied that we were fine, and that we had confidence, and we wanted them to be brave and have faith. Now was the trick-- how did we get this postcard posted? And my father asked one of the SS guards, appealing to his better instincts. And he said, would you do me a favor and put a stamp on this and mail it to my wife? The postcard arrived. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So the train moved. And little by little, we started to realize by the towns we got through, that we were on our way to Buchenwald near Weimar. And we arrived in Weimar. And one of the men in our [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] compartment in the train was our doctor, Dr. Cohen, Dr. Leopold Cohen, who had lost his left leg during the First World War as a surgeon on the front and was known in Hildersheim always with a black cane in order to-- and he was on our train. And we were greeted by SS-- young SS with fixed bayonets and clubs, and were driven from the train into the underpass of the Weimar station. And, and as long as I live, I will never forget the white tiles of the underpass there, facing the white tiles and surrounded by the threatening SS who beat up on us. There was a man standing next to me, a lawyer from Hanover, Egon Berkowitz, who had, as an officer during the First World War-- was wounded so badly that he got the golden-- wounded-- And he had a silver plate on his head. And he passed out. And one of the SS men started beating up on him. And I couldn't stand it. And I said to him, don't you see that this man? He said, we know your war wounds. He said, this animal will get up. Or he will stay there. Well, Egon Berkowitz survived, and survived the war. He got out. And we got-- we were loaded-- ultimately were loaded on buses on our way to Buchenwald. And as we were-- arrived at the Grosse Tor, the main gate to Buchenwald-- which had this ridiculous sign on it, 'Right or Wrong, My Country'-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] we got off. And we were driven through the main gate. And in front of us were SS, who kicked us in our shins and drove us back. And there were others who pushed us from behind. And those of us who were young enough, who could run fast enough, survived. And many of us got killed right then and there, with broken bones, were lying on the grounds of the November night in Buchenwald. And there were, that night, 11,000 prisoners brought to Buchenwald the same way we arrived. And there were-- we were put into barracks. They were still hammering this very primitive wooden structure, built on the clay ground of Buchenwald, without heat, without light, without facilities, without toilets, without water. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And when people later on asked me, how long were you in Buchenwald? And I would tell them how long. And I tried to explain to them that the first three days in Buchenwald, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it wouldn't have made any difference if I was there for three months. The first three days were the test that if-- if we could make it mentally. And I had found my father again. And I had him in front of me. And I begged my father to close his eyes and close his ears and not hear and see what we saw there for the simple reason that we had to stay sane. And we saw during those first three days [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] many, many people jumping against the electric voltage barbed wire to commit suicide. [CRYING] 

INT: What were conditions like in Buchenwald? 

FS: We, we were housed in these wooden-- on wooden floors and four stories high. And, and there was no water. And we were-- some of us, I think, went out of their mind because of thirst. And-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And this all was surrounded by this-- the whole camp was surrounded by electric voltage barbed wire. And they had the tower guards with their guns threatening us with the, [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] the big, big lights that were constantly rotating. And it was a ghostly-- it was on a-- we were on a planet that was beyond any description and any-- And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I, I thought that day and the next day-- I said, if any one of us escape here to tell the world-- [CRYING] 

INT: What did you do for your physical needs? 

FS: We, [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] we had five barracks, the Juden Baraken, the 'Jew barracks.' And the 11,000 were put in those five barracks. And they were like herrings, or sardines, next to each other, those four stories. Pictures of them-- pictures that are known today, were shown in Shoah. And the unbelievable thing was that the first couple of days we're not doing anything. We were standing outside the barracks. It was raining. And some people were-- had used their hats to catch the rain, hoping that they would catch enough rain to wet their tongues. And during those first three nights-- three days-- we saw many-- and some of our friends-- lose their mind and go berserk. Some of them jumped into the open latrines. And it was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Dante's Inferno. It was hell like it had never been described. And nobody could describe it. And many other things that I've read later on about it-- it is impossible to describe all of those things. And-- 

INT: How did you keep from going crazy? 

FS: Pardon me? 

INT: How did you keep from going crazy? 

FS: Maybe by trying to do crazy things and being myself. I saw, after I was there for about a week, I saw a kapo. A 'kapo' comes from the Italian, 'head.' And they use this from the Italian fascists, this term, because Mussolini also had concentration camps. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the kapos were professional criminals, professional criminals who, when they had served their term, the Gestapo would pick them as anti-social. And the Gestapo could arrest anybody without any legal documents. And they were put into concentration camps and were put in charge of us. And by feeding them an extra piece of bread or even, maybe, a piece of sausage that we didn't know, they would be doing things that normal human beings wouldn't do. 

INT: Like what? 

FS: And one day, one day, a 70-year-old man-- I still see him-- picked up a cigarette butt. And smoking was, of course, completely taboo. But he probably was an addict to nicotine. And an SS officer had dropped the cigarette butt, and he picked it up and tried to smoke it. And the kapo came and used his club-- they were the only ones who had arms in the camp, not the SS officer-- didn't carry any arms in the compound. And he took his club and hit this man over the head. And I heard the head split. And, and I went to this man, obviously having lost my my rationale-- you know, that you don't talk ethics to a kapo in Buchenwald. But I said to him, I said, if there's a God in heaven, some day you will pay for this. And I had a number. By that time, I had a uniform on, a striped uniform with my number. And he said, in a Viennese dialect, he said to me, what did you say? And I repeated it. And he took my number down. And he said, you report in 30 minutes to the wash kitchen. And the wash kitchen was a place in Buchenwald where the people who had lost their mind would be taken to. And they gave them hot and cold showers to bring them back to sanity. In reality, they got pneumonia and died there. And I had two friends, one of them a very close friend of mine, who later on stayed a very close friend of mine when he was-- became a great rabbi in Olympia Fields, Frank Rosenthal. He was-- had volunteered for the wash kitchen, to-- together with another rabbi, Egon [? Loewenstein, ?] to be able to say Kaddish for those who died. And when I came in, they belonged to our group, to our youth group. And when I came in and he saw me, the kapo came with two other kapos. And he asked me, in front of the other kapos again, what did I say? And my father always taught me that if you say A, you also have to say B. And therefore, I repeated what I-- I knew I was going anyhow, so I wanted at least-- die with dignity. And I had gone-- before, before I went to the wash kitchen, I went to Baracke 1A, the barrack I stayed in, to tell my brother-in-law and-- what had happened to me so that they knew where I was-- where they finished me off. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I went there. And when I repeated and told them what I'd said, they put me over a block and gave me the usual punishment of 25 slashes with a two-by-four over my back and broke vertebra, broke discs that I have lived with the rest of my life. 
INT: Frank Shurman. 

FS: You asked me how the hygienic condition and the food was. And it reminds me-- let me answer sarcastically. It reminds me that one day after I came out of Buchenwald, one of my friends and neighbors saw me on the street and came to me and said to me, Fritz, you look horrible. Where were you? And I told him. And he said, how was the food? And I looked at him, and I said, Hans-- Hans Voges was his name-- anybody who asks this question will never know. If I would give it to you in detail, you will never know what Buchenwald was all about. We went-- at 5 o'clock in the morning, we went to the kitchen and brought in big buckets something that they called soup. And that was some fish soup. It could have been anything. But it was hot. And we had to carry it from the kitchen on the slimy, clay road. When it was wet you couldn't hold your feet. Even just carrying those buckets, your life was in constant danger. Because if you dropped the bucket, you would have been shot. That was sabotage. So all you had to do is pray that you would get this to the barracks. And there, it was-- every one of us had around his neck in the Jew barracks, the [NON-ENGLISH], had an aluminum container, which was not washed and was dirty. And in it we poured this thing that-- whatever we called it. And we got with it a piece of bread. And I remember that my father used to say to me, I cannot eat out of this. It's too filthy. And I said to him, close your eyes. Don't look at it. But eat it. You have to keep your strength. That was our food ration. 

INT: How often did you get this? 

FS: We got a piece of bread, like a loaf of bread, in the morning. And we lived on that all day long. And you just hoped that you will ration it carefully enough, that you wouldn't run out of it. When it came to the hygienic facilities, there were none. They had dug up, near the barrack, big things that were open latrines. 

INT: Ditches? Ditches? 

FS: Ditches, big ditches, that were open latrines, with-- with trees, which you could sit. And the first three days, there was a diarrhea. And the most indescribable scenes, we saw. People were in pain, and there was no way of cleaning. There was-- it was unbelievable. It was so unbelievable that when I finally was released with a friend of mine, who, by the way, was the photographer who did this photo album, Hamlyn Fleisheke from Hildesheim-- he and I got on the train. And we smelled so horribly that we walked away from anybody, from other people, so that they were not exposed to us. Something that hits me right now, as I say, when we-- during those months in hell, I never cried. I never had a tear. And the first time I cried was when we came to the Weimar station to get our train back home-- individually. We were individually released. And we went to the Weimar station. And it was late at night. And there were Jewish woman from the Jewish organization who were bringing us sandwiches and hot coffee. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] That was the first time I cried. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] You know, because we-- we were not used to humanity anymore. And this was more than we could take. There was another unbelievable thing that is staying with me until the day I die. The-- the [NON-ENGLISH] was the main gate. And-- and whenever you were called for something horrible or good, for your release, you were called to the main gate to [NON-ENGLISH] And it had all kinds of connotations, horror or good news. And one day, the monotone public address system that would constantly call out names, the numbers, they called out my name. And I couldn't believe that maybe I was on the way to freedom. And there was a small group. I think we were maybe 25 guys standing there who were ready to be released. And on one side of the main gate, there were cells, solitary cells, for people with famous names who were ready to be sent to-- before they were sent to the crematorium so that they could be handled individually. And in one of the small cells, while we were standing there waiting to be released, we heard the smashing of a window and a desperate voice screaming, screaming at us and saying, [NON-ENGLISH]. And it was a Protestant pastor, Pastor Schneider, who, in defiance to his captors, screamed at us, [NON-ENGLISH]. And the words were stilled. And Pastor Schneider was dead. They killed him. Martin Zimmer, who was the SS man who was in charge of those individual cells, took care of people like that. And Margie and I, many, many years later in 1974, Margie and I went back to Buchenwald with a friend of mine. And there is today, in the cell, there is a chapel with a huge cross in memory of Pastor Schneider, who was killed at the moment when I was ready to return to freedom. 

INT: How long were in Buchenwald? 

FS: A little bit less than three months. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And the-- again, the unbelievable thing is that the only reason I was released from Buchenwald because of Mrs. Hamilton's affidavits had arrived in the meantime. I would not have been released. And again, one of the-- one of the cannibal kind of attitude, when my sister went to the Gestapo with the affidavits to show them that I had-- the Gestapo agent told my sister that they had a case against me for [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] was racial-- a racial crime, a relationship with a Gentile. And my sister was in shock. And he said, well, I'm not quite sure about it. This was on a Friday or on Saturday. Come back Monday, and I'll check it out in the meantime. So Edith lived with us over the weekend, couldn't tell my mother and so on. And she went back on Monday, and he said, no, he made a mistake, that he was ready to be released. 

INT: Were you released with your father? 

FS: No, my father was released much, much earlier, weeks earlier, because the head of the Gestapo in Hildesheim, Dr. Mercantaler, had it in for him, at least he thought. He didn't know the big favor that he did my father. And he returned-- he ordered his return. And he was put in jail. And the jail was just a couple of blocks from where we lived in a beautiful park. And he was put in this jail. And his secretary would come with papers to sign, for him to sign, at the orders of Dr. Mercantaler. And she would come to jail, and he would be taken out of his cell and had to sign those papers. And while Mrs. Pallenbaum, who was my father's secretary for many, many years, he told her when they were alone that there was-- he could see people walk along the walls of this park by looking through the window there. They couldn't see him. But my father asked her to ask my mother to come at 1 o'clock in the afternoon and walk there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [CRYING] So that was-- the-- the situation in Buchenwald is-- is really beyond description. It is-- much has been written about it. None has gotten close to it. It is hell. Couldn't be worse. It was-- you know, every moment, the-- the-- the constant fear-- every moment you ran into an SS officer and he didn't like your face, that could have been your end, you know. He would call you over and provoke you, and something happened, and he would kill you. My-- my cousin Walter was hit by an SS man because he looked too Gentile. He looked too Aryan. So there was no way. There was no rationale. There was no way for you to anticipate. There was no way of saying, if I do this, I am out of danger. Could have been just the opposite. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] By the way, the men who were-- the kapo, Walter, who beat me, the [NON-ENGLISH], about six months after, he was killed by his own kapo buddies. So there's this peculiar sense of criminal justice that-- [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] So then when I got back-- 

INT: When your father was released. 

INT: Oh, so my father was one day-- was taken over to the Gestapo headquarters to be interrogated by Dr. Mercantaler And Mercantaler told him that he wanted to have him sell his house to this-and-this man. And my father said to him, no, he wouldn't. My father-- that was his house. And he would sell it to our next door neighbor, Dr. Claudets. And Mercantaler said to him, you know, I can get you-- I can keep you in jail. And my father looked at him and he said, Dr. Mercantaler, after Buchenwald, there is nothing-- nothing you can threaten me with. And Mercantaler somehow told him at the end of these interrogations that you and I-- saying to my father-- have crossed swords with great bravery, somehow respecting. And one of the nice things that happened after I got out of service, there was an article in the newspaper, British intelligence looking for evidence that Dr. Mercantaler had been member of the Gestapo. And I wrote to Captain Dane of British military intelligence and told him that not only did I have proof positive, but I was in counterintelligence, and I was-- that was my specialty, and that there was no doubt in my mind that many, many times I had gotten a phone call from them when he answered Gestapo. And I had the [NON-ENGLISH] to find out later on that Dr. Mercantaler was put in jail again after my affidavit arrived. And he died in jail. [NON-ENGLISH]. 

INT: When your father was released, did you know where he was released to? Did you know what was going to happen to him? 

FS: No, I was still at Buchenwald, you know. But he got-- ultimately he got out. 

INT: Was that a concern when you were left in Buchenwald? 

FS: Yeah. I didn't know where he had gone, where they had taken him. You know, there were so many concerns that you didn't know how to sort them out. And you just had to take every day. 

INT: How did you survive? 

FS: I told in the story that the only thing that I think made my father and me survive was the thought of Mrs. Hamilton, that there was this woman in America. She would hear about this, would read about it, and would do something. And that's what happened. On the 14th of November, while we were still in Buchenwald, the affidavits arrived. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So-- and this was before she got my letter that I'd written her on the 9th of November. It was-- as I have often said during those 50 years, if it wasn't for this unbelievable woman, I would have gone up the chimney like six million others. 

INT: After you got home, what was life like then? 

FS: Very difficult. I couldn't sleep in my bed. Because I had gotten used to the hard, wooden boards, and my mattress was too soft. I couldn't-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I couldn't quite understand how people could live the soft life after seeing-- after having seen-- and-- and also living with this guilt of knowing that there were thousands of my buddies still there. And I was back home and being pampered by my mother. 

INT: Could you go out on the street? 

FS: Yeah, oh yeah. In fact, I-- I said to my father on day, I said, you know, I somehow feel that I, going out, the way I look, I'm the walking conscience of those bastards. And-- and I made it very, very clear. I went one day-- I went to this one that I told you about, this professional photographer. I needed an ID card. And I went in to her atelier, in her photo atelier, and when she saw me, she almost passed out. And that somewhere, somehow gave me a satisfaction, you know, Because I wanted them to know. I couldn't talk. I couldn't tell them the details. But all they had to do is look at me and look at my eyes. 

INT: What was it that you had to sign? 

FS: That I would-- that I-- that I was treated well, that there was no physical damage, you know, which was another thing. We were checked out before we were finally released by a prison doctor, by a prisoner who was a physician. And he had to check, go over, see if everything was all right. And I was scared at that time because of the damage they had done to my back. But they didn't use sophisticated equipment. They didn't know, and I didn't tell them. But I thought that I might have blue spots and so on, but I passed. But these were these constant fears. You never know what is the next thing that will screw it up. And-- 

INT: How did you fill your days when you were home? You couldn't work. 

FS: Well, I-- our workshop was still there, and I worked. I-- I made a suit for my father. And I continued to work, not professionally, but-- 

INT: How was your mother during this time? 

FS: My mother was holding up. My mother was the brave, unbelievable woman. She caved in afterwards, after we didn't need her strength anymore. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] 

INT: What happened with the affidavits once you were released? 

FS: The-- the affidavits were there, but the-- our waiting number-- you know, there were waiting numbers that they told us that we might not be eligible to get our visa the next fall, fall '39. My father had a friend at the tax office who was a German, a Gentile German, and who had been a war hero during the First World War but was known of being very, very philosemitic and one day called my father in and said to him-- his name was [NON-ENGLISH]. He called my father in and he said, get out. Get out. Whatever you have to do, get out. He said, get your son out. And my father said, well you know, we don't have any chance until-- he said, get across the green border. Just get out. He said, there will be war. War will be soon. And he knew. He had some information that we didn't have yet. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] You know, in these kind of manifestations of decency among-- also kept us-- kept us going. 

INT: Were things more dangerous for males than females? Were your sisters safer because they were female? 

FS: No, no, no, no, no. No, they were really-- the-- the average citizen I think was frightened by all this. And again, as an indication and as a symbol of some of the things that happened, there was a man and a woman who lived in a little house who were in charge of the parks, a park worker, [NON-ENGLISH] Heineke. And one day-- and my parents couldn't go to the grocery anymore to buy butter. And one day, there was at night, there was the doorbell rang. And my mother went to the door. There was nobody there. But there was a package-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] --with a pound of butter. [CRYING] So-- which is probably one of the reasons that when people judge and condemn people in general terms and say 'the Germans' or 'the Jews,' that is an injustice that I have learned through this whole period should not exist. And then, because of what had happened during Kristallnacht, some positive forces came into effect. And we heard about it, that the Archbishop of Canterbury, Cosmo Long, had been convinced by a classmate of his from Goettingen University, Professor James Franck, Nobel Prize winner, who had convinced him in order to save 5,000 young Jews to convince the British government to start a camp. And the Lord Kitchener Camp came into existence. 

INT: And this was in England? 

FS: And that was in England. It was on the southeast coast of England near Margate and Ramsgate, near Dover, near Canterbury, near Foxton. And I was one of the lucky ones. My brother-in-law and my sister left Germany on the 23rd of June, 1939, eight weeks before outbreak of the war, and went to England. 

INT: How was it to leave your parents? 

FS: Pardon me? 

INT: How was it to leave you parents? 

FS: Horrible. It was horrible for both of us because we didn't know. After Buchenwald, we had no illusions. And-- but the only justification that I felt was that I could work more effectively from England for their immigration. And we went into this camp, which was a prisoner of war camp during the First World War, a very primitive, run-down camp, which we rebuilt. And we lived very primitively on porridge and cabbage in this camp with a potbelly stove in the middle of the barrack. But for us, it was paradise. This was it. This was freedom. And we lived in a civilized society among decent people. And we didn't have to apologize. And then the war broke out. And then-- 

INT: And when was that? 

FS: 1st of September '39 when Hitler invaded Poland, [NON-ENGLISH]. And England lived up to their promise and declared war. And I had gone on the 25th of August, a week before the war broke out. I had gone with the signatures of 25 of my buddies in my barrack to the Bloomsbury House in London to volunteer for the British Army. And the British were so unbelievable. They had no idea what was going on. And they looked at me like I was nuts. You know, why do you want to-- want to go with the British Army? There is no war. I said, there will be. No, no, don't worry about it. England has never lost a war. And they didn't want us. Later on, the majority of the 5,000 in this camp became part of the British forces and furnished very, very valuable-- many of them got into the intelligence service. And-- 

INT: And what happened to you after this? 

FS: I-- I left-- I left-- I finally got my invitation to come to the American embassy in London to get my immigration visa to the United States. And I couldn't-- couldn't fathom that, you know. This was-- and it was 'the' day' for me. It was 'the' door. I said in my story, I walked through many, many doors to come to this point. But this was 'the' door. And I hoped and prayed that I would meet the conditions or the things that were necessary to meet the qualifications of the American consulate. 

INT: Were you with your brother-in-law or any other relative? 

FS: They left. They left much later. I came to America first. 

INT: January 16th, 1996. Frank Shurman. 

FS: You know, it's actually January 15th. 

INT: Correct. 

FS: January 15th,-- 

INT: Correct. 

FS: --1996. 

INT: Correct. 

FS: When-- when we finally left Germany on that 23rd of June, 1939, and my parents and my younger sister took us to the train, and it was this bloodletting experience that we had experienced so often of saying farewell without knowing if you would ever see them again, if they would ever see us again. And I still see the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] --the white handkerchiefs, you know, disappearing. And-- but we somehow felt that we were getting closer to the possibility of getting my parents and my younger sister out. And we went to-- we went to a-- to a-- to the border, Aachen. Aachen was the border before we got into Belgium on our way to England. And in Aachen, we were taken off the train-- all of the people that were going to the Lord Kitchener Camp-- for final examination. And after they-- after the Nazis had stolen, robbed, thieved everything we ever owned, here we were going through an examination, where we-- the most unbelievable examination I've ever gone through, where we had to undress and we had to bend over. They wanted to see if we had hidden diamonds. And we were checked out. And I felt later on that they had saved no effort to make our leaving Germany as easy as possible for us. And we couldn't wait. And then we went through Belgium, and we arrived in England. We saw the White Cliffs of Dover in contrast to all the darkness and blackness that we left behind. And we met these wonderful people, and I have always been fond and grateful for the unbelievable hospitality that the English offered us. 

INT: What work did you do in the Lord Kitchener Camp? 

FS: And in the Lord Kitchener Camp-- the camp was self sufficient. We had to do-- we either work in the kitchen or work in the camp university or do whatever or rebuild. And we had to rebuild the roads. And it seemed to me that one of the toughest jobs was doing the concrete work of building roads. And since I didn't know yet how tough I had to be in order to survive in the United States, I picked this and volunteered. There weren't many volunteers for that, building roads, concrete roads. And we had a-- we had a man who was in charge of building roads. He was a former architect from Germany by the name of Herz. And some of the roads were-- kept water after every rain. And there was a [INAUDIBLE] in the camp that was saying, you don't need brain to build the roads as long as you have Herz, 'herz' being 'heart.' And there was-- again, there was lots of tension in the camp because of the horrible fears that we had for our beloved ones that we left home. And you became-- because after the war broke out after the first of September, there was a complete cut-off. We had no more communications. We didn't know if my parents were still there or if they were on their way to Auschwitz or that sort. At that time we didn't know about Auschwitz. Auschwitz didn't exist then, but whatever. And I couldn't stand it. I couldn't sleep at night. And I started to realize there was one possibility. We had good, good friends in Denmark. A Danish girl had spent two summers as an exchange student at our house and tried-- she and her husband, who was a pastor, tried to get us out of Germany before the war broke out and didn't succeed. But I wrote my letters to my parents to Crystal Merch in Denmark. And she would take them out of my English envelope and put them in a Danish envelope and then send them to my parents. And my parents would correspond the same way. And this way, we were in contact, even though greatly delayed by two senders and by all kinds of other-- but it helped us. And then, as I said before, on the-- the-- the end of April, I went to the American Embassy. And I passed, and I got my-- the most important stamp I ever saw, the most important paper, my passport with the immigration visa. 

INT: This is in 19-- 1940? 

FS: 1940. And as I left the embassy, there were newspaper photographers standing there with their cameras aimed at the exit. And I wasn't surprised at all that they were there to take the picture of the happiest guy in the world. I was a little bit disappointed to realize that they didn't wait for me. They waited for some know-wells, the American Under Secretary of State, who also happened to be in the embassy that day. But even today, I feel that my business was much more serious than some know-wells' business ever could have been. And then I left England on the 1st of May from Liverpool and got on a ship. We didn't know the name, but it had anti-aircraft guns on top of the ship because we were going through submarine-infested waters. And the first four days and four nights, we slept and ate and walked with our life belts on in order to-- and the ship that took us across the ocean was the Britannic of the Cunard White Star Line, which we found out later on. And we were on the sea, and we traveled in a zig-zag to escape them. And after four or five days, we were out of danger. And then on the 10th of May, there was a note at the postal office that Belgium, Luxembourg, and Holland had fallen. And when I arrived in America, I had $28 in my pockets, 10 pounds. I had 10 pounds. And the people in New York were so doubtful about the survival of Great Britain that I had a tough time changing the 10 pounds into dollars. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And then I was in America. 

INT: What was it like when you came into America, saw the Statue of Liberty, or whatever it was you saw first? 

FS: The-- one of the things that struck me, the obvious, was after blackout and after complete blackout and darkness, we came to the city with light and light and light. And I had never seen skyscraper, and here were these skyscrapers and thousands of cars driving up and down. And people, fast talking, all somehow seemed to have a goal in life. And I was arriving, and I didn't know which way to turn. I didn't have any [NON-ENGLISH]. I didn't have any people that I knew that I could go to, with the exception that there was a old friend of mine from Hamburg who used a pharmacy-- used to own a pharmacy in-- in-- in-- in-- in Hamburg. He and his wife were at the boat to pick me up, and they took me to their house in Weehawken, New Jersey. For the first couple of days, I stayed with them until I found a job. And I went-- I arrived on a Saturday, and I went to Fifth Avenue on Monday morning and started working for a very fine custom tailor near Saint Patrick's Cathedral, Shiner Limited, on Wednesday morning. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And then when things started, when the temperature got hot in New York, they told me that they were closing up because all of their customers went to the sea and into the mountains. And they would reopen on-- after Labor Day, I could have my job back. But in the meantime, I had to live. And I had been-- it was stupid of me-- too proud to go to an aid agency. I had felt that I was now on my own. And after I was there for about four weeks, I got a letter from my father that they needed $700 for the passage, for the steamship, because the American steamship lines wouldn't accept the German money anymore. And so I thought in those days that the problems of yesterday became very small with the problems that I had to face then. And I was without a job. I had to wait until after Labor Day, if I could survive that long. And then I finally buried my pride and went to a Jewish aid-- the refugee committee. And they told me that they wanted to get me out of New York. There was a concentration, and they wanted to disperse us. And would I be willing to go to Elkhart, Indiana? And I was at that point ready to go anywhere. And I went on the Greyhound Bus to Elkhart, Indiana. And there was a wonderful guy, met me the Greyhound Bus Station, Orry-- Orry Goldberg, who owned the men's store in town. And he was Mr. Refugee Committee. He greeted me. And the shock was kind of tremendous, after New York-- Elkhart. Anybody who has ever been in Elkhart, Indiana-- and I wasn't quite sure if I had been so wise to survive Buchenwald to end up in Elkhart. The heat of the summer, slept with the-- without any air conditioner-- any. It was pretty horrible. And about a week later, a letter was forward to me from Palm Springs, California, Mrs. Hamilton, with a check in it for $700 as a loan so that I could buy the passage for my parents. And I took that as an indication of the earlier imperative, go west, young man. And I got on the bus and had told Orry Goldberg that I was leaving Elkhart. And Orry Goldberg assured me that someday I could be king in Alkhart but I would be a schnorrer in Chicago. And I told him that I didn't believe in monarchy anyhow and would-- [LAUGHS]-- give up to be a king in Elkhart. And I left. And wonderfully enough, that when I went in the Army, Mrs. Goldberg gave blood to the American Red Cross in my name. So I went to Chicago, and booked out the passage for my parents, used the $700, and then tried to find a job in Chicago. And that became very, very difficult for all kinds of reasons that I don't necessarily want to go into. I mean, there was some social workers at the Jewish Committee on 130 Northwest Street who told me that I was not justified to come to Chicago, that I belonged to Indiana because I had been sent to Indiana. And I told Miss [? Sabbath ?], the granddaughter of Judge [? Sabbath ?], that I was not a piece of luggage that could be shipped back and forth, and I would stay in Chicago. And then another wonderful thing happened to me. I met a newspaperman, Francis Chase, Jr., whose mother had died when he was born. And he was brought up by a Jewish neighbor. And he took me in. He and his wife practically adopted me. And-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] then about six months later, I got a letter from my father that they had been called to the American consulate in Hamburg, and were asked by the American consul, who was paying for their passage. And my father, who always was honest and told the truth, told them that his son, with a loan from Mrs. Hamilton, and the [INAUDIBLE] was paying for the passage. And the vice consul at the Hamburg, consul general, American consul general, an obvious anti-Semite, told them that it was in violation of an immigration law that was passed in 1924, and therefore, he had to refuse their visa, because it was an immigration law that said, whenever organizations pay for your immigration, you become an illegal immigrant. And that dated back to 1924 when the steel and coal industry brought thousands and thousands of East Europeans on ships and in order to protect American labor. So in a misinterpretation of this law, my parents were sentenced to death by Vice Consul Getsinge. And I will not bless his name. And my father wrote me a letter, and it was a letter that looked to me like his last will. It was his last will. Told me what to do with my life, and this was it. And Frances Chase-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] --hadn't seen me like you would see me today, couple of times, and I broke down. And I didn't know what to do. And all my dreams had-- suddenly were wiped away. And Chase, being the wonderful short-story writer he was, came up with an unbelievable idea. He had once worked for the Anti-Defamation League for Miles Goldberg as an undercover agent and had interrogated Father Covlin in Michigan as a newspaper man. And he went that night to the telephone and called Miles Goldberg to ask him if he could see him. And Francis Chase and I went to 130 Northwest Street the next day and talked to Miles Goldberg. Miles Goldberg listened to my story and finally got on the phone and called Senator Barbour, the Republican of New Jersey, to ask him to do him a favor and contact the consul general in Hamburg and guarantee our political liability. And it was this go-between that ultimately got the visa for my parents. And they arrived here. 

INT: Was this your parents and your sister? 

FS: My parents and my sister. 

INT: What was that reunion like? 

FS: I remember the story that one day while I was living with Frances Chase and Billie Chase, his wife-- we had a big, colored woman was the maid there. And in the morning, just as I was leaving for work, the Western Union man delivered a telegram. And it said, Received visas, happy, secured passage, received visas. And I'd opened the telegram, and I grabbed this lady. And she-- she didn't quite know what had happened to me. I was dancing around with her, screaming at things in a languages that she didn't understand. And then afterwards, I went to my newspaper man at Howard Street. I always bought my newspaper from a little Jewish fellow. And I hugged him. And he didn't know what had happened to me. And I got on the L to go downtown, and people looked at me. They didn't quite know what happened to me. But I didn't care. I'd finally made it. At least I thought I had. My parents arrived with my sister, arrived in New York. And the consul general in Hamburg had issued the visa on the 6th of December, 1940. And it was valid only for six months. And he filled in, it will become void on the 6th of May, 1940, instead of 1941, because he was used to write 1940. And again, either a bureaucrat idiot or somebody who was anti-Semitic at Ellis Island said this visa is not valid and we cannot let you in. And my parents were put into Ellis Island. And a good friend of mine, who was at our 50th wedding anniversary last September, who was also at our wedding, a girl from [GERMAN], went to Ellis Island to see my parents. And on the way back she was on the boat, and there was a young man standing next to her, and she was crying. And he said, what's the matter? Can I help you? And she told him. And he said, I'm a lawyer. I'm an immigration lawyer. After we get on land, let's go up to my office, and I will settle it for you, and they will come out. And the next day, they got a letter from the Minotola National Bank, the vice president of the Minotola National Bank, saying that there is a letter, irrevocable credit of $4,000 in my father's name deposited by Mrs. Hamilton with the stipulation to give $200 every month. And will you please give us your new address in America so that we can send the first $200? And based on this letter, my parents were released from Ellis Island. And they arrived. And we-- I had, with the help of a wonderful man, Benedito Martino, had established an apartment on 44-- 4404 North Racine, an apartment with borrowed furniture, or furniture that was given to me by people, and with the two portraits hanging in the apartment. And my parents arrived, and my sister arrived, and we took them to the apartment, and I gave my father the key. This is the key to our apartment. And everything was very happy, overwhelmed. And then we got one day an invitation. And we met the whole Hamilton family at the Palmer House at the Empire Room. There was a big party set up to meet my parents, which they had never met, and Laura and the rest of my family. And it was the first time that we all met and the beginning of a long friendship, for which I'm eternally grateful the rest of my life. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Then-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] a year later, my mother, who couldn't quite understand why I couldn't bring two brothers of my father over like I had brought them over-- and I made the mistake and gave in and sent a letter through the International Red Cross to these two brothers of my father. And the letter came back addressee unknown. And my-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [CRYING] My mother was home alone when the letter came. [CRYING] And she knew what it meant. [CRYING] 

INT: What did it mean? She committed suicide. [CRYING] And we thought this was the end without ever having a new beginning. But little by little, we got back on our feet. And my sister in the meantime had found a job working as a secretary in a real estate office. And my father ultimately was asked to join this office. 

INT: What do you think it meant to your mother to know that her brother-in-laws were dead? 

FS: I think it meant-- I think it meant a little bit-- you know, Stefan Zweig, one of the great German writers who went to South America and was very successful and committed suicide after the fall of France, I think that there were many people who saw the-- the destruction of civilization as we knew it, you know, who-- like I always felt that if it wouldn't have been for Winston Churchill, who was so stubborn and held out, you and I wouldn't be sitting here today because the Nazis would have won the war and would have come and so on. And I think after she realized that we didn't need her unbelievable courage and strength anymore, she caved in. And she was home alone. And she was lonesome. And she was in a country whose language she didn't understand. And when she went to the AMP or Jewel, there was not little butcher in a small town who knew her. And she had to punch buttons. And this was a complete strange surrounding that she couldn't handle anymore. And when this letter came, which meant that this beloved brother of my father with his family was gone, she couldn't handle it. 

INT: Was your mother Jewish? 

FS: No, my mother was not. And my mother was one day asked by the-- by a man that came to our house, gestapo, and said to her, aren't you Aryan? And my mother looked at him and said, with great shame, I admit that I am. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And my mother was also the one who, when I was trained for my bar mitzvah and came down, 10 days before my bar mitzvah, after studying the siddur for many, many months and the [NON-ENGLISH] and the [? parsha ?] and so on-- I came down with scarlet fever. And the-- our hazzan came to my mother and he said, this has never happened to me before. And he said, he is my student, I finished him, I was ready, and now he got scarlet fever. What do I-- what do we do now? And then my mother looked at him and said, Herr Bach, he has to learn another siddur. And the hazzan said to me later on, he said, here's this goy telling me what to do. [LAUGHS] And that was my mother. 

INT: So then your family-- 

FS: So then-- then we-- we, little by little-- in the meantime, Pearl Harbor has happened. My mother was still alive. That was another thing that got to her. America was at war. And I told her that I would go in the army, and she said to me one day, not as long as I'm alive. I will not separate again. So there were many things. And Sydney Harris came over to our house and wrote a very, very sensitive story about my mother's death. [CRYING] 

INT: And then you joined the army? 

FS: After, after we got our [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] things organized and started to realize that, life had to go on-- and I felt that my father and my sister were economically on a-- on a basis where they could support each other, support themselves. I was determined now to get into the army. The peculiar thing was that I went to a dive port in Evans and here were these harmless good citizens who looked at this guy who was legally still a German. And he wanted to get in the American army. So what was wrong with this guy? And I couldn't explain it to them. And they told me that they had to have the FBI check me out first before they could accept me. And I had given up everything I had done up to this point. And I got a job through a friend of mine who said to me-- he knew the personnel manager at Sears Roebuck. And I got a job at Sears Roebuck. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they knew that I was waiting to be called into the service. But somehow, we got along beautifully. And one day, somebody came and shopped me. Willmark Shopping Service. And I must have had a particularly good day. And I got rated so high, that I was called to the store manager, who told me that Sears Roebuck had plans for me. After I came out of service, they wanted to put me into executive training. And I somehow felt kind of a happy. Because I had heard that after the First World War people were selling apples. And at least I had a chance to work with Sears. And it was somehow kind of a come-down for me when, two weeks after this meeting with Mr. Simmons, I was called into personnel. And there was a new gal in personnel-- had a job to interrogate or interview people who had a shortage or an overage in their cash register. And I tried to explain it to this girl, that it was very simple and it happened often. That because of the seven cash registers, there was overage or shortage of whatever. And I had a shortage of $19.95. And to make a long story short, she ultimately told me and threatened me that if I wouldn't sign the statement that I had been interviewed, then she had to turn it over to the store manager. And I told her to go ahead and turn it over to the store manager. She didn't know that the store manager and I were on real good terms. And-- But in the meantime, I became interested in that girl. And ultimately, this cute little girl at personnel at Sears became my wife. And she-- after I went into service, she went into service. She went to the Coast Guard Academy in New London, Connecticut, and got her commission. And it was my particular tragedy that not only did she find that I had a shortage of my cash, but she also outranked me. I was an enlisted man, and she was an officer. And I figured, c'est la guerre or c'est la vie. So be it. And then, I, I, I went into-- went into the army. And after I was through with basic training on the 11th of November, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we had to pass the commanding general because of Armistice Day. 

INT: 1942? 

FS: 1942. And it was a bitter cold day. And the winters in Virginia can be miserable. And all of these guys-- my buddies-- were cussing about this horrible cold winter. But they didn't know that it was the 11th of November that we were marching. And five years earlier to the day, I arrived in Buchenwald. And this time, I was marching with a gun on my shoulders, in American uniform, passing the American flag, the symbol of freedom and dignity for man. And I was very happy without being able to explain to them why they shouldn't cuss. So my army career was, was a very, very interesting one. And if I would have designed it myself, I couldn't have done a better job. I finally ended up-- and I first was in a prisoner of war camp in Camp Ashby, Virginia, where we had 3,000 Afrika Korps prisoners in the camp who had been transferred from Camp Forrest, Tennessee, from another camp where they were running the camp. And now they came into Camp for-- through Camp Ashby. And one day, my commanding officer called me in and told me that three days after they arrived, that they had gone on strike. And he didn't know what to do with them. And he said, you treat these bastards like human beings, and look what they are doing to you. And I looked at my commanding officer. I was a private, had just gotten out of basic training. And I didn't know if I should have the nerve to tell him what I wanted to tell him. And I looked at him. And I said, Colonel, if you give me your authority for 24 hours, I think I can straighten them out. And he was under enough pressure because the man who owned the fertilizer plant in Suffolk, Virginia, was the brother-in-law of the commanding general of the Third Service Command. And he knew he had to solve it. So he called his adjutant in. And he said, whatever Shurman tells you, you go ahead and do. And I was-- at that particular moment, I was in charge of the camp. And the first truckload of prisoners arrived, with their big Afrika Korps white caps on. And the first guy got off. And I asked him, I said, are you on strike? And he said, yeah, I'm on strike. I said, two weeks bread and water. Sergeant, take him over there in the guard house. The next guy got off, told him the same thing. And the third guy tried to get wise and said, no, he was not on strike. He couldn't take the fertilizer dust in the fertilizer plant. And he knew I knew that he wanted to trick me in violation of the Geneva Convention, which we had studied. And I looked at him. And I said, what outfit did you belong, by the way, in the army? He said, I was in the Afrika Korps. It was obvious to all of us. And then I said, I've never been in Africa myself. But let me ask you something. If there is a sandstorm in Africa, and General Rommel ordered an attack for 3 o'clock, did you go to him at 2 o'clock and say, Erwin, let's call it off. It's too dusty here. And they all started to laugh, except this guy. And didn't think it was funny. And he said, that's different. He said, at that time, I was still a soldier. I said, you're not a soldier anymore? He said, no. I said, all right, you all heard it, four weeks bread and water. He said, you can't do this to me. According to Geneva Convention, you can only give me two weeks bread and water. Only for soldiers. I said, you're not a soldier anymore. And from that moment, the atmosphere changed. And the guys from then on did not go on strike anymore. And we running the camp. And then one day, I found among our prisoners-- not Afrika Korps-- those who had arrived after the invasion of Normandy. I found a soldier who was a PFCO, a Corporal, who was a pastor. Pastor Medlach, Gustav Medlach. I called him in. And I asked him if he would help me. ANd I said, help me to make human beings out of these animals. And he said, what do you mean? I said, I want you to conduct Sunday morning church services, every Sunday morning, and see if we can re-educate them. He said, they won't come. I said, why? He said, the Nazis in the camp won't let them to attend church service. And I said let's not call it church service. Let's call it Sunday morning celebration. And talk about all kinds of things that you want to talk about, good things. And he accepted it, and we started out. And I had the satisfaction of having by-- anti-Nazis in the camp come to me and said, there's something going on. And they didn't know that I was the spiritus rector of this Sunday morning celebration. They thought the Nazis had organized it. And ultimately, we ended up with hundreds and hundreds of prisoners who, every Sunday morning, went to the service. And ultimately I said to Medlach one day-- and I said, now let's move this camouflage and start to teach ethics and start to teach religion and so on. The thing that I got a big kick out of that was-- one day there was a pastor who had come to Camp Ashby, an American pastor, and who told me after a couple of Sundays that he couldn't waste this time on those four guys who that came to church to him. And when we had ultimately hundreds of these people there, I called him. And I said, you know if you have free time on the next Sunday, why don't you come to Camp Ashby? I would like to show you something. And I took him to the church services of Camp Ashby. And he sat there and he says, I don't believe this. And I said, what do you mean? He said how did this happen? I said, you know, Pastor. I said, I'm Jewish. You know that. He said, yeah, i know. And I said 2,000 years ago, another Jew tried to teach you what later on became Christianity. And that's all I did. [LAUGHS] And ultimately I was transferred out of Camp Ashby and transferred to Third Service Command headquarters in Baltimore into counterintelligence. And we formed a team of five agents who somehow had a little bit of the same background as I had. We had one fellow from Holland, a Jewish boy from Holland, and others who were trained and trained to become interrogators and do political classification of prisoners, and that-- do political classification so that AMG, Allied Military Government, could use our classification done in the place of an American POW camp for reconstruction of Germany. After they were being sent back, our classification sheets were part of their personnel file. And it was an unbelievable, fascinating work that we did for a couple of years. And we had 300,000 prisoners of war in America, and many of them in the Third Service Command that we classified. And at the same time, we did war crime investigation as we ran across things. 

INT: What were some of the most interesting war crime investigations you were involved in? 

FS: I found a guy who, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] who was in the SS-- SS Hohenstaufen who, during the Battle of the Bulge, had captured-- his outfit had captured members of the 101st Airborne Division. And he participated in the killing of 25 of enlisted men of 101st Airborne Division. And you know, those things didn't just come to you. It happened that one day, a prisoner of war who was an anti-Nazi came to me and told me that while he was in Oxford, England in a prisoner of war camp, this man Fritz Zilke had bragged about the fact that he had participated in this killing. And that was all he knew. So I had Fritz Zilke transferred from this camp in Virginia to Maryland, where I interrogated him. And he was in the camp where there were many other SS men there. And he didn't know what I was-- he pretended he didn't know what I was talking about. And I had to use my CIC technique that we had learned. And I told him that he didn't have to tell me anything. All I would do is turn him over to the SS in the camp, and tell them what he had told me. And they would take care of him. And he knew that was true. So little by little, he started to give. And little by little, this whole case developed. And he showed me pictures of the commanding officer who had given the orders to kill the 25 101st Airborne Division men. And we took, took depositions. And the depositions then were put in the regular legal form. And we had a man that came in-- one of our members-- CIC members who was an FBI agent in civilian life before he came in the army-- 

INT: What does CIC stand for? 

FS: Counterintelligence corps. And so we have this, regular deposition, with question and answer, so that ultimately this deposition could be used to sentence him as a war criminal. And that went with his file. And then there were the [INAUDIBLE] that I had in Fort Meade. The intelligence officer was a man who was a very tough guy, big Irishman who was in the 101st Airborne Division, had been wounded, sent back, and was now the intelligence officer in the prisoner of war camp in Fort Meade, Maryland. And one day, he called me-- no. One day, after we took these depositions from Zilke, Zilke came to me one day and he said that some of the people in the camp had threatened him that he had turned a traitor because he was called out and called out. And I said to Captain Baker, who was the commanding officer of this little camp-- and I said, transfer him. Transfer him to Fort Meade, so that we don't have a killing here which you have to investigate. And he had him transferred to Fort Meade. And I had no thought-- didn't think of Major Erwin, I think, was his name-- that he was in Fort Meade. And I got a call from him at headquarters one day. And Erwin, who had become a good buddy of mine, called me and said, my gosh. He said, you almost got me court-martialed. And I said, what happened? And he said, you sent that little bastard in. And when he saw the black eagle on my battle jacket, he started to shake. And I knew there was something wrong. And I looked in his file, and I saw that he had killed 25 of my buddies. And I lost my temper. My Irish temper went through with me. And I lifted him up and threw him against the wall that he almost went through the back walls. And he had to be hospitalized. And, and I said, you know, I didn't think of it one moment when I sent him to you. Well, he said, I'm grateful you did. And he also called me one day and told me that one of the PWs had come to him and said there was a counterintelligence agent who used to be a high-ranking Hitler Youth leader. His name was Frank Shurman. So-- and Erwin called me and he said, you know-- he said, I always knew there was something wrong with you. He said, but now I have the goods on you. So I said, is he in the camp. He said, yeah, he's in the camp. I said, I'm coming out. Went from Baltimore to Fort Meade. And he bought this guy in who had made the statement. And I said, you know, we're very grateful to you to tip us off about this high-ranking-- ranking Hitler Youth leader. And I said, can you describe him to me? He said, well, I don't know him personally. He said, a friend of mine told me. And I said well, where's the friend? And he said, he's in camp. I said bring the friend in. I said, we want to follow this all the way until we find this guy. So we had lots of fun with that. [LAUGHS] 

INT: How long were you with counterintelligence? 

FS: Most of my Army time. 

INT: Until when? 

FS: Until May '46. 

INT: Is that when you left the army? 

FS: Mhm. Mhm. 

INT: And then what did you do? 

FS: And then I came back to reality and tried to figure out how to make a living. And, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and ultimately ended up of-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] taking off-- taking on fine menswear lines as a manufacturer's representative, and built a territory over 40 years. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I hope built a reputation for integrity and honesty. And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I had a following among many of the fine stores in the Midwest. And, and I'm grateful [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that I have reached this stage in my life. And I would like to, if I may, end it with a prayer that I wrote for Rosh Hashanah [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] in 1991. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And it says, it was the 9th of November 1938, almost 53 years ago. About 75 men of our congregation were led by armed SS around our burning synagogue, our house of worship for 90 years. A day later, we stood with 11,000 other Jews on the bitter cold windswept mountain they called Buchenwald. In the weeks and months to come, we saw the beast in man. We saw our tormentors and all their cruelties, creatures with human faces but without heart or soul, without the qualities which transform beings in human beings. We were witness to the very beginning of the Holocaust. We had no illusions about our future. Men said their last prayers. For the first time in my life, I prayed with all my soul. [HEBREW]. It gave me new strength. I was not alone. [HEBREW], you were with me. These months challenged the very foundation of our physical and spiritual existence. Our religious values and our faith were constantly exposed to extreme tests and doubts. Would one of us escape this inferno to tell the outside world how we died? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In humble and deep gratitude, oh God, I thank you for the gift of life. I have been deeply aware of the fact that the last 53 years of my life have been a special bonus. I too could have been in the number of the 6 million. But most importantly, I'm grateful for your guidance during those years. I was searching for your way. You taught me, and I believe in teshuvah between man and God, and between man and his fellow man. I believe that it is possible for people to repent and to change. I believe that people who seek to repent should be given a chance to do so. I deeply believe that hatred, unbending hatred is not an emotion by which I can live, nor a philosophy by which I want my children and my children's children to live. Hatred does not open a road to the future of civilization. It does not pave the way to our God's kingdom, Judaism's hope for peace on Earth. Oh Lord, in your great mercy, you led Margie and me back to that once sacred and now desecrated place where our synagogue had been burned into ashes on that very day 50 years earlier. In your great mercy, you made it possible that over 800 citizens of my hometown witnessed the dedication and consecration of a magnificent memorial, crowned by a bronze replica of the temple in Jerusalem as a memorial for those millions and as an admonition for a new generation who were there to ask for redemption. In your great mercy, you made it possible for your humble servant to end his prayer on this cold night of November 9th, 1988. [SPEAKING HEBREW] 

INT: Have you been involved with Germany since the war? 

FS: Yes. 

INT: In what way? 

FS: In supporting some of my loyal friends, friends who risked their very existence at the time when they helped me, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] friends that now [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] were the victims of this unbelievable madness that destroyed Germany and the rest of Europe [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] because they had followed a mad man. And I knew that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] these people who were now starving and starving to death, friends of mine, needed my help as I needed their help before. And I got-- last week, I got a phone call from a friend of mine in Hamburg to tell me that his wife had died at the age of almost 80. And she was with me as an unbelievable, loyal [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] friend, and helped me through very, very dark years. And when they were bombed out, Margie and I sent them blankets, and clothes, and food. And they told us, years later, if it wouldn't have been for those blankets, they never would have survived the cold winter. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I felt that I was doing only what they would have done for me in a similar situation. And something that occurs to me that I never mentioned and I think was a real important turning point for me. When I first came, after basic training, in Camp Lee, I had a-- I was assigned to a new prisoner of war camp in Camp Lee. And the first time I went through the camp, I interrogated-- just verifying records for those PWs. And I was interrogating them. And, and I was very firm with them, but not-- never taking advantage of the fact that they were prisoners. And right at that time, fortunately I had an old friend of mine who was a famous psychologist, a professor who has taught at the University of Frankfurt, Professor Dr. Kurt Bondi, who, at that time, was professor at William & Mary in Richmond, Virginia. And he and I had been in Buchenwald together. And he and I had been in the youth movement together. And he had-- he could have been-- age-wise could've been my father. And one day, I went on-- over the weekend, I went to William & Mary [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and talked to him. 

INT: And when was this? When was this? 

FS: In [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 1943, beginning of 1944. And told him about my experiences of meeting for the first time, going through the emotional experience, going through a prisoner of war camp when the gate opened, and I saw the guard towers surrounding the camp. My head was almost busting. And, and I told him about my attitude toward these prisoners. And he listened very carefully. And he was a very wise man. And he sat-- finally sat me down and said to me, if you believe [PAUSES FOR 2 SECONDS] in the future of this world, don't go into your work with a feeling of hate. Hate will not destroy them. Hate will destroy you. Hate will boomerang. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And if you really want to do your job effectively, try to force yourself to an objectivity that might not be yours right now. But you can learn it. And this Saturday-- and I think it was a Saturday-- at the study of Kurt Bondi, was a very, very important milestone for my future work. And I think it found its culmination in the letter that I got from Colonel [? Dahl ?] at the end of my service, when he mentioned in a paragraph that it was my unbiased attitude and my humanity that was worth mentioning. And I somehow felt that Professor Bondi's wisdom had not only given my book great objectivity, but saved my own soul. 

INT: Prior to that time, what had your attitude been? 

FS: Pardon me? 

INT: Prior to that time, what had your attitude been? 

FS: The most logical thing many people do, hate. You know, here were these-- the same kind of hate that the Germans felt toward us, because they were programmed by their vicious, antisemitic literature. And it is a little bit like we later on found out in South Pacific in that beautiful phrase, it is so easy to teach hate. And I think we have seen it so many, many times over in the last few years, what hate can do to us. We have seen it most recently with the killing of one of the great men that Israel ever produced. And I was at that time, when I heard the news and watched the program, I went completely-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] broke down, like I broke down today. And I think it may be also an indication of what I have been striving for that two days after the assassination of Rabin, I got a long distance call from a friend of mine in Bonn, Germany, who is just retired recently as German ambassador to Italy. And he called me because he had to talk to somebody that-- who had an affinity for all this. And he said, Frank, are you aware of the tragedy not just for Israel, but for the world, that this assassination has cost us? 

INT: The assassination you're talking about is Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister of Israel? 

FS: Yeah. 

INT: Do you think of the Holocaust often? 

FS: Yeah. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I-- you know, maybe not of the Holocaust in the terms of Auschwitz, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] but of the destructive forces that were set into motion by this evil man in so many, many different ways, how he destroyed families, how he destroyed so many Einsteins and so many Mahlers, and so many-- and so on and so on, in, in his-- out of his brutal inability to feel and to understand. And that is true, of course, with all the Nazis. And I have-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And, and, and, and that's where my tolerance really ends. I have no, no feeling [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] for any Nazis, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] even though I'm reading-- right now, I'm reading a book on Albert Speer, one of the war criminals who served 20 years and felt that he hadn't served enough, one of the decent, if there was such a thing. [PAUSES FOR 2 SECONDS] But the others were insensitive beings, not human beings. 

INT: What message would you like to have your children and grandchildren and future generations to have from your experience and from your testimony today? 

FS: Maybe [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the message of my prayer, maybe [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] tying to understand [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] what makes us all tick, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Trying to-- [PAUSES FOR 13 SECONDS] trying to have tolerance or sensitivity with those less fortunate than we are. Have a social conscience. [PAUSES FOR 11 SECONDS] Walk in humility. [SIGHS] 

INT: Has your belief in God changed from before to after the Holocaust experiences? 

FS: No, I never-- I never thought that God was dead, like many people thought. I, [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I think that God gave us a choice. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And we-- and mankind sometimes fouls things up and makes it impossible for us to do God's will. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't think-- I don't see God as somebody who sits there and manages things. I think that [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] he has-- he or she or this being has laid out basic rules. And it is so hard for us to obey them. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And I-- I'm deeply touched, constantly, by those who had the, the moral courage [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] of standing up to these evil forces. And I think right now of somebody who, to me, was always somebody who-- in the Catholic Church, he would be sainted by now. And that's Leo Baeck, Rabbi Baeck, who was the chief rabbi of Berlin, and was taken to Theresienstadt. And in his arms, two of his sisters died. And one day, at the special orders of Eichmann, there was an order out to kill Leo Baeck. And his name was called out. And a Dr. Baeck answered the call, but not Leo Baeck. There was another Dr. Baeck, a physician. And he knew that one day, he would have to die. And he gave his life for Leo Baeck. And two days before the liberation of Theresienstadt, or three days, Eichmann came to Theresienstadt and found that his orders had been disobeyed. And he talked to Baeck. And he said, this mistake will be corrected. And then two or three days later, the-- Theresienstadt was liberated, and Baeck was saved. And when the press came in and found that Baeck was alive, they came up to this saintly man and said, what should we do? What should we do with the perpetrators of all this? Baeck looked at them and said, let's go back and teach the book. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And that, I think, is the sign of ultimate greatness and saintliness. 

INT: Is there anything that you'd like to add briefly that we didn't cover during the interview? 

FS: I think I covered to the-- to the best of my abilities. 

INT: Thank you very much for sharing your story with us today. 

FS: Thank you. 

INT: Appreciate it. 

FS: To the-- [PAUSES FOR 2 SECONDS] This is my father, Willy Schurmann, [PAUSES FOR 2 SECONDS] born 1986-- 

INT: 1886? 

FS: 1886, In Pattensen, a little town near Hanover, Germany. 

INT: When was this picture taken? 

FS: This picture was taken in 1946 in New York. [PAUSES FOR 2 SECONDS] 

INT: Good. 

FS: This is my mother, Alma Schurmann, nee [? Mueller. ?] This picture was taken in Hildesheim, Germany, in 1938. This is Frank Shurman. At that time, his name was Fritz Schurmann. And it was taken in Hildesheim in 1938. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This is my sister Edith Rehfield nee Schurmann. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This picture was taken in 1938 in Hildesheim. She now lives in Scottsdale, Arizona. This is my younger sister, Hanne-Lore Schurmann, now living as Lore Graham, the widow of the American ambassador Pierre Graham, in Bethesda, Maryland. The picture was taken in 1938 in Hildesheim. This is the store front of my father's organization in Hildesheim. He owned a very fine men's store. 

INT: When was this taken? 

FS: Picture was taken two days before the liquidation sale started in May-- in May 1938. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is the picture of Mrs. Augusta Rahr Hamilton, of Manitowoc, Wisconsin. She was our angel. Without her we wouldn't be here. 

INT: When was this taken? 

FS: It was taken a year before her death in 1976. 

INT: In Wisconsin? 

FS: In Manitowoc, Wisconsin. This is our wedding picture, both Margie as an ensign in the SPARs Coast Guard Reserve, and Frank Shurman in the uniform of a staff sergeant, but being a special agent in counterintelligence. The picture was taken by [? Ellie ?] [? Marcus ?] in New York, the day of our wedding, the 24th of September, 1945. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] This is after finishing basic training in Camp Lee, Virginia. Private Shurman is ready to go. 

INT: And this was when? 

FS: 1943. This is in Camp Ashby, Virginia. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The-- the spokesman of Camp Ashby, PW [? Mettlach, ?] is being interviewed by the commanding general of the third Service Command, Major General Hayes. Next to General Hayes on the right hand side is Staff Sergeant Shurman. 

INT: On our right-hand side, the viewers right hand side. 

FS: Yeah. This is the commanding general of Third Service Command, Major General Hayes, at somehow a turning point in my military career. After he left, a few days later, Colonel [? Hessler ?] received orders to transfer me from Camp Ashby to Third Service Command into counterintelligence. And I then became special agent in counterintelligence. This is the memorial in Hildesheim, placed-- the sacred place where our synagogue used to be. And it is a magnificent monument, so beautiful that it is shown in travel books like the Baedeker as the thing to see in Hildesheim. 

INT: When was this put up? 

FS: In 1988, on the 50th anniversary of Kristallnacht. And Margie and I were privileged to be there at its dedication. 

INT: And the prayer that you read was at that dedication? The prayer you read, no? 

FS: No. 

INT: Ah. 

FS: That was done at [INAUDIBLE]. 

INT: I see. OK. 

FS: This is a citation I got toward the end of my army career. It is called Army Commendation Ribbon. And it is based on three letters of commendation of general officers. Then you were eligible for the Army Commendation Ribbon. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And it specifies in detail what I did during the prisoner of war program. And it is signed by Major General Eddy. This is a wonderful family picture of my children and my grandchildren, at least two of my grandchildren, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] taken on the 15th of September during the celebration of our 50th wedding anniversary in Deerfield in our garden at 1010 Sunset Court. Starting to the left is my daughter-in-law Bonnie, next to her, her husband, my-- our son, Daniel Shurman, next to her, our daughter Beverly Schurman-Lavitt, next to her, my son-in-law Dr. Alan Lavitt. In front to the left is my granddaughter Amanda Lavitt. Next to her is her grandmother, Margie Shurman. Next to her is her grandfather Frank Shurman. And next to him is my grandson Adam Shurman-Lavitt. 

INT: And this was in 1995? 

FS: 1995, In September. This is my granddaughter Deborah Shurman, living in Pasadena, California, the daughter of my son Daniel Shurman. 

INT: When was this taken? 

FS: This is my family. After a long day of introspection, we come to this end, which we call [NON-ENGLISH]. And next to me is my wife of 50 years, Margery. Behind me is my son-in-law Alan Lavitt, and our granddaughter Amanda Lavitt, and our grandson Adam Schurmann-Lavitt. And Schurmann is spelled S-C-H-U-R-M-A-N-N, like I used to spell it, at the request of my beloved daughter Beverly. And that is Beverly Lavitt, also known as Beverley Schurmann-Lavitt. 
BEVERLY LAVITT: One of the things I'd say that has been the most important thing I've learned from my father's experience has been the importance of developing one's own strength and self-sufficiency. And I don't know why I'm crying, but it's a very important moment. [SOBS] I'm glad to be here. [SOBS] 
MARGERY SCHURMAN: And I think one of the things that I find most remarkable about my husband's experience is his ability then and since to differentiate between the Nazis, who were the perpetrators, and the Germans, who had a long, proud history, and went through the valley along with their victims, at least retrospectively. We go back to Germany often, because my husband has been able to maintain friendships that were deep and meaningful friendships. And the younger generation of our friends ask Frank many, many questions, which must be very painful to them. How could this have happened to us? What were my parents doing at a time like that? Could it happen again? What can we do to prevent it? They ask very soul-searching questions. And they trust Frank to give them good answers, because of his ability to be part of it, and yet separate himself enough from it to be able to recognize sincerity, loyalty, and strength. 
BEVERLY LAVITT: And to not be bitter. 
MARGERY SCHURMAN: And to not be bitter, absolutely. 

