INT: The day is March 9, 1996. The survivor is Sol Rosenberg. The interviewer is Adrian Hirsch. The city and state are Monroe, Louisiana. The country is USA. The language is English. I am Adrian Hirsch, A-D-R-I-A-N H-I-R-S-C-H. The date is, March 9, 1996. I'm conducting an interview with Sol Rosenberg. We're in Monroe, Louisiana, USA. Could you tell me your name and spell it, please? 

SR: My name is Sol Rosenberg, S-O-L Rosenberg, R-O-S-E-N-B-E-R-G. 

INT: Was that your name at birth? 

SR: Yes. 

INT: Have you gone by any other names? 

SR: Yes. Salek, S-A-L-E-K. That's what they called me when I was a little boy. 

INT: And in the camps, did you use any other names? 

SR: In camp, I used Salek, S-A-L-E-K. 

INT: OK. Did you have any nicknames as a child? 

SR: Well, I had a lot of nicknames. In different camps, they called me different names. 

INT: What were some of your nicknames? 

SR: They used to call me, 'Salek, the Boxer.' You know, I used to box. In some places, they called me the [NON-ENGLISH] you know? 

INT: What does that mean? 

SR: Well, it's a conniver, you know? [LAUGHS] In different camp, you know, they called me. 

INT: And what was the day that you were born? 

SR: You want my actually birth? My actually birth which I was born, November the 18th, 1926, in Warsaw, Poland. 

INT: And your age now? 

SR: My age now is 69. 

INT: You said you were born in Warsaw. 

SR: Yes. 

INT: Which part of the city were you born in? 

SR: I think I was born in-- in a mixed neighborhood. I think they told me I was born on Grietska. I don't know. And then we moved to Nowolipki. And then I live on Alefki Street. But I think I was born on Grietska. I don't know-- Grietska, Geinszca, I don't know. Tell you the truth. 

INT: What was your neighborhood like when you were growing up? 

SR: Most Jewish people. Most Jewish people. 

INT: What was your father's name? 

SR: Froim, F-R-O-I-M. Froim. 

INT: And what was his occupation? 

SR: Baker. He was a baker. 

INT: Did he have any hobbies? 

SR: You know, in the old country, not too many people have hobbies-- especially a person with a family-- that they work hard to take care his family. His hobby was when he could bake. He used to make torts. He could build a nice ship. He took very much pride in that. Or make a airplane. He used to, for relaxation, he had a knife and whittle wood. Make different thing. I guess. I don't know. What would you call it? A hobby? I don't know. I guess. 

INT: And what was your mother's name? 

SR: Hajalah. Haja. H-A-J-A-- I guess. Although her real Yiddish name was Hajalah they called her, my mother. 

INT: And did she work? 

SR: She worked with my father, very hard. Rough life in Europe. 

INT: Did you have sisters or brothers? 

SR: I have two sisters. My oldest sister was Frania, F-R-A-N-I-A. Frania. Only name I know her is Frania. And my youngest sister was named Tobcia, T-O-B-C-I-A. Tobcia. 

INT: And do you remember their birthdays? 

SR: I-- I couldn't tell you that. Only thing I could remember, my older sister, Frania must be older for me by 16, 17 months. And same way my youngest sister must be. I must have been older. Same thing like that. 

INT: Did you have any other family members, like grandparents or aunts and uncles, who lived nearby? 

SR: They all been scattered around through the city, uncles and aunts. 

INT: Did you see any of your other family regularly when you were a child? 

SR: Yes. Yes. And I did see one of my father's sister in Majdanek. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I didn't believe it. I saw her in Majdanek. Her name was Bela, B-E-L-A. Bela. 

INT: And her last name was? 

SR: [? Saltzmann. ?] Her name was [? Saltzmann. ?] Z-A-L-C-A-M-N. [? Saltzmann. ?] 

INT: When you were a child, though, did you see her frequently in Warsaw? 

SR: Yes. Yes. That was my father's-- very close. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I met some my cousin after the war. She told me Aunt Bela and my papa were twins. But I don't recall that it's true, you know? 

INT: When you grew up, what was your neighborhood like? 

SR: Well, it was a Jewish neighborhood. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] People were working hard. Most I can recall in my early age I was happy. People were happy, like myself. There were Orthodox Jews, Hasidic Jews, Levant. And I guess what you would call reformed Jews. There was no such a thing, reform, but I would say my parents were reform. And my father didn't wear a yarmulke, and my father didn't have a beard. Was like myself, shaved person. And we knew we were Jews, you know? My mama, light the candles Friday night, on Sabbat, usually. Was a big thing, Sabbat. We all sit down and eat together. 

INT: What was the Jewish community like? 

SR: When I grew up in Warsaw, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there were a lot of poverty. As a young boy growing up, I did not realize what poverty it is, what it mean. Then, when I grew up, and I got a little older, and getting interesting what happened in the world, and I realize, looking back, it was a lot of poverty in Warsaw, Jewish people. A young little boy, I didn't know the difference. I knew you're rich, or you're poor, you know. I didn't even know the word 'poverty,' you know. There was a lot of poverty. Myself and my family, we were fortunate enough. My father was a baker. He was a good provider. My mama worked hard. We never went to bed hungry. And we had a roof over our heads. And we wore clothes-- parents-- my parents would buy us clothing. But we didn't have the luxurious thing what people have. So onto that standard living from people-- the Jews in Poland, I guess we were middle class, you know. We were not poor. We had good health and plenty to eat. So how could you be poor, you know? We didn't own no cars, you know. Or television, like today, or live in luxurious home, like I got today. I don't think nobody in Warsaw had a home like I got today. I used to visit when I was little. The president's house was not like this. So it was not America. Let's put it that way. 

INT: Was your childhood a happy time? 

SR: I-- I was always a happy young boy. I-- I lived on the street, and was skating around, ice skating. I loved to skate. And then, I always had a lot of friends. I was very well-built, athletic type, young boy. I could run fast. And I could do things what some of my friends were not able to do, so they admired me. I was big enough for my age, always physically very well. And I was intelligent. I knew from wrong to right. I thought I knew. And then, I was doing-- I was getting involved in things. I've seen what was going on in Warsaw, and listened from my parents, from my grandfather, anti-Semites, anti-Semites, anti-Semites, you know. They're [INAUDIBLE]. They're doing this. They're doing this. All sorts of-- you build in the mind-- mind something wrong with this-- with the people and with the civilization, I would say, that they single us out, the Jews. And I never felt, in actuality, never felt myself as a secondhand citizen. I always thought I'm as good as anybody else. When I was a young boy, I was very particular and demanded-- demanded-- demanded nice clothes. I always was clean. I always shined my shoes. As a young, little boy, always, I impressed the girls. And I had that character in me. And then, in between nine years and 10 years, before nine years, somebody told me it's an organization named Betar. And that's a Zionist organization. It's building characters young people. Teach them what Judaism really mean, what Jews dream, to impress me. And he told me, why don't you come over with me? And I went over one day. And believe it or not, I met Menachem Begin. And he start talking about and-- and lecture us. And I was impressed, as a little boy, because I always have dreams and aspirations and to do better. And I realized something wrong in our society, for we Jews, people living in Poland. And the way Menachem Begin lecture, he [INAUDIBLE] me, as a young, little boy. And I really got excited, and went home and told my parents. My father told me, now what have you got in? In something? I say, I got to buy me a shirt. All the little boys wear brown shirts. Well, what do you think? Are you militia? Are you-- you a Boy Scout? I say, I guess something to [? think, ?] a Jewish Boy Scout, I told him. Well, my mother went along and got me a brown shirt with a hat. And I was learning about Jabotinsky, you know, about Betar, about how proud you should be, and what that mean to be Jewish. It's a gift from God, a very special people. It's not the way the Pollacks treating us. We have better dreams and more things common to our people. And we got to work with it, and dream, and lecture, and study. And one day, we're going to have to leave that country and build our own country and see through it. And I got very enthusiastic. Very, you know, I just constantly talked about it. And I thought that's the greatest thing ever happened. And the greatest person ever lived is Menachem Begin. He really impressed me, very much. I thought something like angels would came. And my dreams and my thinking was with him. And I became very, very enthusiastic. And then, I was joined the Betar. And we had meetings, you know? And we'd talk about how to get some more-- some boys, talked to my friends to join us. Some of them did, and some of them did not. Then, being physically very attractive [INAUDIBLE] a young boy. I used to go out on a special field and play soccer. And I was really good. And as a young, little boy, just say 10 years old, I played with 15-year-old boys. And then, when I got 10, 11, 12 years old, before the war broke off in 1939, started getting a little warmer, I already was playing with 18, 19-year-old boys. They called me to join them to play. And then, during the years, like when I was 11 years old, I joined the Macabee. It was a boxing club. And being physically very well-built and strong, I start boxing. I was pretty good. And with it added to what Menachem Begin taught us, never turn your cheek. And somebody went-- a Pollack approach you, don't be scared. Stand up to him. Then he knew that he meet a challenger. Don't just run and-- and let him have the satisfaction over you. You little Jiddick. He can do what you want to do. You-- you as good as him. Better than him. And that was, through the years I did not worry about a Pollack to attack me. Matter of fact, we used to have little knives, little thing. I always used to carry a little knife. Not to hurt anybody, just I kept it. I liked it. Not to be secure more, to have a little knife. My father used to had a knife, and always whittle woods, make different thing. I guess knife attract me through the years. And I always carry a little knife. And was occasion when I was not quite 13 years old, bunch of Pollacks cornered us, another couple little Jews we were. They want to really take us over and give us a-- a good whipping. And I pulled that knife. And he told me, well, you're one of the tough little Jiddicks. I say, how about you, Pollack? I'm as tough as you are. Now, what do you want? Well, you know you a Jiddick. I say, sure. I know who I am. I'm proud who I am. What do you want from my friends? I was in front. And he said, I guess we'd better go, Kasczik, you know, to another one. And there were many, many occasion which I stand up for myself, and for my friends, and for my people. In school, they used to pick a strong, little Catholic boys against a small Jewish boy. [LAUGHING] And believe it or not, the Jews picked me always, [LAUGHING] picked me always to face the challenge. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was always victorious. I don't know it was luck or mine ability to stand up and not to be afraid, or the lecture from Menachem Begin, from character, the way it was built-in in me. It helped me always through all these years. And I met, as a water boy-- in my cabin club, there were champions-- Polish champions, Jewish boy. Lola Groenstein, Maxie Rosenbloom, Max Baer, and Goldstein. In the heavyweight division, Julius Neudinck-- blond-looking, fine-- you know, they loved me, all them-- all of them. And they told me, one day, you're going to be like we are. And I always dreamed to getting-- I-- I would have been a good boxer. The [? war-- ?] I had the ability, the body, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and the technique, you know, which I learned from my friends. Mr. Rutzstein, he was the Polish champion in featherweight. Lola Groenstein, fine. He was quite older than I was, you know. He loved me. So Julius Neudinck. And I would run-- with the right people, I was associate. So-- so I would say I had a good time as a young boy. I was not boring. I was not missing anything. I had love for my family. My two sisters, they loved me. They always try to bring little girl, introduce me, want to be with Salek. When they-- they used to learn-- we had a microphone where you have to turn them, you know, with a big wheel. And I used to turn. My sisters always come in with new songs and to try it out with me, how to dance. And they taught me how to dance. I never had a dancing lesson. However, I can dance as good as anybody else. The first step I learned is from my two sisters, you know. They were two beautiful girls. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I get [SOBBING] emotional, you know? [DRINKS] I loved my sisters. I wish they would be alive today. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] They were proud of me. [SOBBING] They loved me. [SOBBING] I was the cream, I would say that-- that they just looked at me, because I'm something special to them. And so my parents. I was [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] very unique when I was a little boy. I loved jewelry as a little boy. My aunt had a factory from toys. I used to make rings. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I tried the rest [? difference ?] than anybody else. I always complained about clothes. My mama say I used to-- God bless her; may she rest in peace-- you know, how much clothes do you need? How much clothes do you need? And always loved clothes, til today. I'm a sucker for new things. I like to buy all kind of clothes. Some of them, I-- I've got suits I've never worn any of them, you know? I just buy it, because I see something what I like. It's in me, not from today, because I'm financially able to buy. It's just built-in in me and my nature. I grew up with it, to look good. And wanted to look good. I never was a show up. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In school, when we went, a lot of the Pollacks, they used to get jealous. All the little girls, Polish girl, liked me, talked to me. Took them on a date. I would call it, a bicycle. I'd put them on the frame. It was a big deal to take a girl on a bicycle. And when I have a dime, I was a rich boy. I could buy two icicles, you know? One for her, one for me, you know. So I would say, in my youngest years, I had a good, good time. Exciting youth. Just unfortunately, my dreams, when the Nazis came, diminished my dreams. I thought one time I'd be a professional soccer player. My grandaddy always told I'd make a good engineer. And at five years, my best years were diminished, you know, during the war. As a young boy, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when the Nazis came, conquered Poland, Warsaw, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 1939. Fully, I didn't even realize the cruelty of the Nazis, you know. 

INT: Had you heard about the Nazis before they came? Had you heard anything about them? 

SR: Well, I didn't hear about killing. I didn't hear. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I thought, you know, I'm being educated. And my father, my family, read about it, we Jews. And then I went and took special Hebrew lessons, you know, different thing, when I learned my religion. We Jews suffered through thousands of years as slaves in bondage, in, you know, in Egypt, and then all of them. And we'd suffered through Pharaoh, you know, through Hamans and the whole thing. We had a lot of enemies through the years. And then the inquisition time, I knew about that. And then, from Rome ghettos and all that. [? But I didn't ?] realize they will hurt us or kill us or. I thought we were just going to be slave labor, working for them. And one day, miracles do happen through the years. And we will be free. I didn't realize that kind of cruelty could occur and happen in a civilized world. 

INT: Had you received any news from German Jews who had fled Germany for Poland? 

SR: I received. We had a lot of families came to Warsaw. And they say they broke the windows, you know, the Crystal Night. They took away everything. I-- I never did hear about shooting. Some of them were sent to Dachau, I did hear. Some Jews, they kicked them out of the country. They didn't want no Jews. Burnt up all books and then marked every Jew and kicked them out of the country. But I-- I didn't know it was going to be going on, killing. I didn't know that. I was not aware of that, and-- [WIPING NOSE] nor my parents. [WIPING NOSE] We didn't realize something like this could occur in a civilized world. And we did, you know, realize and know it about Poland, with anti-Semitism going on. I had family. They have to study, leave for Rome, for Austria, to France, going to study to be doctors or some other kind of profession. As a little boy, we knew we had limited things in-- in Poland, even. And then the Germans, really-- when they came to Poland, we knew we're not going to have a picnics. We're just going to have to work for them assigned, and live in miseries, I guess. 

INT: Just to clarify, you talked about school and-- and fighting with the Poles and going out with Polish girls. What kind of school did you go to? 

SR: I went to a school-- we were living on [INAUDIBLE]. And then when I was just a little boy, my father wanted me to learn Hebrew. So he put me to a Hebrew school. Then I have to go into a public school. So we moved when the [INAUDIBLE] was a lot of public Jewish schools. I went to school on [? Alektarovnia ?]. Was a Polish Catholic, were few Jews only. And I was not a very happy young boy. I did not like it. And so especially in the morning, you come in and you have to make all the prayers and kneel. I did not kneel. I turned red and blue and all that. Then got to the point that it didn't bother me anymore. After a year, they sing, I sing. You know. And I just didn't take it that serious. It didn't bother me. 

INT: So it was a public school or it was a Catholic school? 

SR: It was a Catholic school. I guess it was a public school. It was nothing but Catholics. 

INT: So you learned some of the Catholic hymns and-- 

SR: Yeah. Yes. And it was, if I'm not mistaken, [? Lesna? ?] I think. Or [? Alektarovnia. ?] I cannot forget. Meshuga. So many years. I never thought about that. I forgot the streets. It was on [? Alektarovnia ?] Street. And I had good relation in school. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] There were another couple Jewish boy around there and Jewish girl. And I never had any-- too much problem. On one occasion, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I took a little girl out. And we just go out. We were children. You know. And one of the Pollocks approached her. And told her, you going out with a dirty Jew. [SPEAKING POLISH] I said, wait a minute. I'm not [SPEAKING POLISH], dirty Jew. I'm a clean boy. Cleaner than you are. And smell better than you. You [POLISH], I told him. [POLISH] means you Polish swine. I told him that. And he tried to pick up his arm. I was stronger than he was. And I hit him. And I broke his nose. Broke his nose. The next day, came in. The big principal was a big old Polack about 6' 4'. Big. Walk and comes in with a paddle. What did you did to him? I said, well, we had a fight. He said, I want you bring your father tomorrow to school. I wouldn't tell my father. I told my mother. And the principal told her that she owed that boy 25 zloty to fix the nose. And they expelled me for two days from school. Then I had another few occasions. Most of the occasions I have in school, I respect him and they respect me. I was a good student. I was very well behaved, intelligent. Some of the other boys, another couple of little Jewish boys they used to hang around with me. They were not my friends. I don't mind to tell you, I had more the little Catholic friends. And the Jewish friends, they-- I was a hero to them. When I was a little boy, I didn't realize the meaning why they been hanging around me. In later years, I realize I must have been a hero to them. They felt safe with me, to being around me. And for some reason, my heart was for them. I had a feeling I better stay with them, because they might get hurt, and I could help them. And my little brains thinking that way. So another few occasions, I had a little problem. Most of them, all the boys did have problem in that Catholic school. And being grown up-- growing up, and I joined the Maccabi. That was a big, big educational for me. And very proud to be on an Maccabi and Betar. And my daddy, he was not an athletic type. He was very strong, taller than I am, worked all his life hard. And-- and he followed his father's footsteps. He had seven brothers and a couple sisters. And all of them, a big, large family, been working hard. I'm sure when he grew up, time was a little harder too. And my father was a good provider for our three, for two-- two my sisters and myself. So I had more time to think about, and to live in a different environment than he was living. And after all, in Warsaw, there were about 450,000 Jews living. That is nice. And we have our own clubs, our own swimming pools. And that helped, the environment, myself, to be satisfied, to be with my people. I was not missing. You know. Summertime we went to the-- to the beaches. We had a part of the beach belonged to Maccabi. Most were young Jewish boys and girls. We have to catch street cars. Didn't have enough money to go with the street car. Conductor came in. We have to jump off the car, get another car. I never paid, never paid the street car. I didn't have no money. 

INT: And the beach was where? 

SR: Almost out of city, on the edge of the city. [INAUDIBLE]. Jews-- there was a beach, big beach. We owned a part of the beach, the Maccabi, in Warsaw. So we had kayaks over there, swimming pool, water polo. All the boys used to play. We played volleyball on the-- on the-- on the beach, swimming pool. The young Jewish people, you know. We had a good time, and our own association, which people who were-- and they had an environment, which I was involved. There were a lot of Jewish boys and Jewish girls were-- didn't have that opportunity what I have to join that association. Like I mentioned earlier, there were a lot of-- lot of poverty in the city, which I could see. There were beggars begging for bread, hungry. You know. It was not a pretty picture, which I can look at now and see. I understood calling us-- people, were saying poor people, Jewish people. Living-- people talking about we have some poverty here. That's nothing. Whereas people live in one room, lot of children, and parents. Myself, I would call our environment, our housing, we had a house. We didn't have a house. We bought an apartment in a large building. We had two bedrooms, a kitchen, and a hall. And I can recall when I was a little boy, my mama was working hard. And we had a maid. We had a white Russian maid. And we had a rollaway bed, which she put in the hall and slept. Soon we got up, she was up, and closing and put that rollaway bed around by the kitchen. Kitchen was little large. And one bedroom, my parents slept. Another bedroom, my two sisters and myself. I can recall there were a little curtain. There was a big [INAUDIBLE] rope. A rope, old time, it must be 100 years old, with a mirror. And it had a door on, I think they had it. The girls had a, I think a little-- little curtain, like a shower curtain. You know. That's what I can picture now. I would never thought about to remember things like that, so many years back. [? But I can-- ?] Something come back to you, you know, when you talk about your land, you dream about out how to-- I can't recall. I think they had a little curtains, something like this. And the bathroom was in the hall. You have to have a key. And next tenant was older couple, and with a young man. They had this one son. He went to the university. So he didn't stay in the house much. He was-- belonged to-- very intellectual, very bright young man. I think he studied-- maybe he went to Italy, I think. He studied law or something. So about the old couple, they had the right to go into the same bathroom as we are. So we had a key. In the morning, it was the worst time, you know. Most of them want to go to the bathroom. And we were already fortunate enough. We were up the class to have a bathroom. You know. And then they had facilities for the building downstairs. There were maybe 10, 12 commodes and all kinds of stuff, dirty. You know, we-- [INAUDIBLE] we been trying to keep it clean. So what I want to tell you, on that standard, we were really semi-comfortable. At that time, we thought we were up the class. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] To a lifestyle in America, is not comparative. You know. 

INT: When the Nazis came in 1939, how did your life change? 

SR: Very much. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I was bitter. You know. I was hurting constantly, hurting in my heart seeing what the Nazis, and the Polacks helped them, took part. Coming even before the ghetto, before the ghetto, think about it. They coming in the street and loot, take away from the store, hitting the men, making fun out of Jews with beards. And-- 

INT: Did you have to wear a Jewish Star? 

SR: Not right away. I don't remember. Later on we had to wear on the left side, a David Star. You know. And it started getting a little out of hand. You know. Jews were living in the Irish, different part of Warsaw. They-- they have to leave the places. And when the Nazis formed that ghetto, then everybody, oh, Jews from all over Warsaw have to move in. And we had some uncles and cousins. They've been living in different part of Warsaw where most Aryans were living. And they have to leave that places and come to the ghetto. And I was a 13-year-old boy with a lot of dreams. And I would say I was strong character person. And been hurting me watching the Nazis, their behavior. And I was warned many, many, many times, Sol, don't start no problem. Don't start no trouble. Try to get away. And there was one occasion a man been selling coal, and I had a little fruit stand. Came in, a soldier with a Pollack. And took a couple apples and some-- some fruit. And walked away. And I holler, hey, you didn't pay for that. And he say, smart Jew. [POLISH] is smart. And I said, look you took that apple, pay for that. And the man from the store, I do not remember his name, he says, Sol, let him go. Let him go. I say, he did not paid you. That was in store. It been bother me, the behaving, their arrogance. This was just a start. I just tell you a little occasion. It did bother me very much. And some boys, they were not hurt like I was. Maybe in me, build in, you cannot eat something for nothing. You have to earn things to get something. And the way the looting and robbing, and hitting, it did bother me, very much. 

INT: Where there any book burnings? 

SR: Pardon? 

INT: Where there any book burnings in Poland? 

SR: Book-- the-- I did not see. They burn up all the synagogues, different things. Not special seeing book burning. I cannot recall. 

INT: You were 13 when the Nazis came. 

SR: Yeah. 

INT: What about your bar mitzvah? 

SR: I didn't have no bar mitzvah. I was not yet ready. I was supposed to have a bar mitzvah. I didn't have no bar mitzvah. You know, something I supposed to have bar mitzvah, then the war broke out. But I didn't have it. 

INT: Were you preparing for it when the war broke out? 

SR: I went to a school to learn Hebrew. And I had a private rabbi. It was not a rabbi. I did not say that a rabbi. It was a teacher. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] He tried prepare me for bar mitzvah, tried to teach me. But I never was bar mitzvah. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't-- I can't recall whatever happened. Something happened. We didn't went through with that. And it used to bother me, for a long time bother me. So after the war I was fortunate enough, and I went first time to Israel. I was bar mitzvah in Israel. You know who bar mitzvah me? Rabbi [? Danzig, ?] in Jerusalem. I was really happy. So you see, I did have my bar mitzvah. My dreams, they came true. It was a hard time for me to be in that character, what I was. Seeing the Nazis and the Polacks, what they're doing to the Jews, I took it hard. Then they assigned us to work the forum, the [? Chernyakov ?], and Jewish, you know, the [? forum, ?] Jewish council. 

INT: This was before you moved to the ghetto? 

SR: In the ghetto. You know. 

INT: When did your family move to the ghetto? 

SR: We live on [? Novalitki ?] and [? Nalefki ?] street. I-- I lived with my aunt-- aunt and my parents. On [? Novalitki ?] 49, 39, I can't remember exactly what street. And we were assigned to work, you know, once a week, or twice a week before they started really evacuating us. You know. And I used to work. I had a little cart, came to each house. I was pretty good build, you know. And-- and so I work for my-- I didn't get assigned. My father and once my uncle, [? Lazar ?]-- I don't know. He paid him something. And I went to work with that cart, something like this. 

INT: And what did you do with the cart? 

SR: I have to go work to report to the Jewish council. And they pick us off the trucks, and take us places to work for the Nazis, shovel snows, or different things. And then one time, it was 1941. I was a pretty good size boy already, you know, 15 or better, and strong. And I was assigned to work. The truck came and picked us up, and took us to the airport. There used to be a Polish airport. And it was 1941. And it was cold, in December, very cold it was. And I shoveled snow. And they bring us, and bring us, back. One day, they wouldn't let us go home. And they assign us to Polish barracks. And I spoke German, because my grandfather spoke German. You know. So [GERMAN], I says, yeah. I speak Deutsche. [SPEAKING GERMAN] You know, come with him. So I became a handyman and a German officer. It's supposed to be top officer. I was cleaning the rugs. And they had a little girl over there, a daughter. She was about 15 years old too, maybe 16. Her name was Amy. She got to like me. So I didn't realize yet all the consequences what could happen. I teach her how to dance. And half the time I work, half the time I didn't-- just talk and schmooze. And her mother knew. She was watching me dancing. They fed me good. I was a fair looking guy, wearing not the best clothes that were clean. Could talk to her, and she was really start liking me. And all the Jews who were working with me, they started worrying about. You know, here's Sol fooling around with the commander's officer's daughter. Oh, they'll fire-- or shoot us, shoot him. Matter of fact, I made love to her. We-- we really got close. And she told me she wanted me to run away to her grandfather's farm in Germany. I told her, Amy, you know, I'm Jewish. You know. Going to get in trouble. She said, nobody have to know you're Jewish. You're going to my grandfather and on the farm you work as a Polack. I say, I don't know, Amy. It don't look so good. And constantly I was assigned to her house. Her mother came and picked me up all the time, you know, from the barracks. 

INT: Were you living in the barracks at that time? 

SR: Yeah. Polish barracks. 

INT: So at that point you were separated from your family? 

SR: From the family. That's why I'm going to tell you the story. And Amy got a little too close to me. And I didn't even realize the consequences. Every other night the Germans, they have parties, dancing, you know, drinking, having a good time. And I had my David Star, you know, on my left side. Amy arranged me to take that star off and put it, she got me a white [INAUDIBLE]. You know. To be one of the servants on the parties too. Meantime, the Polacks knew who I am. And the Polacks could not well speak German. That was my luck too. And they've been looking at me. They didn't know what was going on. And I supposed to be one of the server. And I danced with her mother. I danced with-- with Amy. I had a good time. I didn't realize the consequences what can happen. One day we went back to the barracks. One my-- one of the Jewish boys, he must have been in 30s. He took me on the side, and says, Sol, do you know what you doing? Do you realize that that is the officer's daughter? You fooling around with her. You going to get us killed and yourself killed. You better cut that out. Do something about that. It's too dangerous. Believe it or not, I was laying on the-- in the barrack for us, on the top. I've been thinking about, they're right. You know, I was not dumb. But I didn't realize the consequences, what could happen. When you have a good time as a young boy, you know. And the next morning, I got to the mother place, and I see a bunch of the soldiers big trucks. And I ask one of them [NON-ENGLISH] Warsaw? He say, yeah. He's going to pick up [NON-ENGLISH]. You know, could I go with you? Oh, yeah, you can go. He didn't know who I was. He see me [INAUDIBLE]. And that's why I ran away and went back to the ghetto. I jumped the wall, I jumped many times the wall. Came back to the ghetto. My parents were really still-- 1941, my parents still were living, where we were living in [? Novalipki. ?] They were worried about me. They didn't know what happened to me. I didn't have no telephone. Didn't have no way I could get in touch with them. And they were really worried about me. And my mama had said, I had hard time to sleep. Every time she been asking thousands of people, did you see Solly? Did you see Solly? Did you run on the commanders? You were next day-- trucks were going to work. And they told her, I'm in [NON-ENGLISH]. That is a field out of Warsaw. And they told them it's one place, that's what my mama told me. One place where they're staying over there. That must be Solly stayed over there. And they were-- when I came back, it really was a-- really a reunion, a very happy reunion. When I'm not mistaken, I think it was Friday. And we had Shabbat. And I had a good dinner. We been praying. And-- and it was a very happy occasion to see me back. [INAUDIBLE] to be truthfully, I did like that girl, Amy. It's a silly-- silly thing to say. She was so different. She was not prejudice. She knew who I was, you know, Jewish. And she told me, I'm better than all her friends in school, in Deutscheland. Oh, and I look better. And I'm more intelligent, and educated than all of her friends, and all that propaganda about Jews, and the whole thing. And she used to tell me I look as good as anybody else or better, as a Jewish boy. And she had a lot of plans for me to do. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was not afraid. I was not ready, let's put it that way. I was not afraid. And she told me when the war will be over, we gonna get married, have children. You know how young people have dreams and ideas, and the whole thing. And I did emphasize, you know, Amy, I'm Jewish. You know, I always told her. [NON-ENGLISH] She used to tell, oh, makes no difference. You know. You-- you-- Solly, you-- you a person, and I love you. You know. And puppy love. You know. I really did like her. I was really lucky. You know. I guess my companion was luck, I guess. I didn't realize what could happen. You know. If her parents or something would find out what was going on between Amy and myself. 

INT: Do you remember what her father's name was? The commander's name? 

SR: He was a horrible, mean, mean person. He used to look at me always and see in the house. I come in. I clean the floors. I clean the rug. Wipe the pictures, everything he always look at me. You know. He mother, Amy's mother, was a very attractive lady. And she was a nice lady. Mother, everything mother. I say, how many times I express mother is a [SPEAKING GERMAN]. 

INT: After you left Amy's house, do you know what happened to her? 

SR: You know, it used to bother me. I never left a message, nothing. And it used to bother-- even concentration camp, how silly that was. I've been thinking about Amy. Then after a bit of time, you know, all that war been going on, slowly, I forgot about-- forgot about her, didn't have her in mind. I was constantly running for my life. I mean, you couldn't think, you know, the same way when that occurred, you know? I've been thinking about Amy, not-- thinking about her because I never left a message, never told her goodbye you know? I'm sure-- you know, actually, one of the boys who was with me, she'd been telling them this-- you see I never-- I forgot about that, you know just, remind myself, not just, but I knew that. She did ask about me, what happened to me, she never seen me. One of the fellows told me, you know, I met that little German girl. She's been talking about you, like that. That was final. It might serve as a character, as a human being, and-- and intelligent way to do, I don't care who she was. I did-- there was no occasion and didn't have the opportunity to tell goodbye. For a while that, you know, hurt a little bit. The time was such a miserable time after that, not too long they tried to evacuate the whole ghetto and everything, and I was constantly running and didn't have time to think about Amy. 

INT: You said in 1941 that you-- you left and returned to the ghetto to your parents. Were your sisters still living in-- 

SR: Yes, my sisters were still, until 1942. Then we still had a happy-- I mean, a happy-- we had a family. I had a mother, I had sisters, and-- and my father. We-- People were starving to death. People dying of typhus, isolated some places in Warsaw. And it was a rough time in Warsaw, very rough time. People would-- 

INT: How did-- how did that affect you living around-- 

SR: Yeah, seeing how people dying, I try help and be helpful to some of my friends, to my family. I risked one time running around all night looking for bread, bring bread to my aunt, you know? 

INT: What would have happened if you had gotten caught? 

SR: At this time, I didn't know. They would kill me or something. They would punish me, I guess. I-- I was pretty sharp, you know, looking boy constantly running. Leave the ghetto many times, jump over the wall. And-- 

INT: Who was guarding the ghetto? How-- how were you able to jump over the wall? 

SR: I was a pretty tricky boy. I always find holes, breaks. Then [? running from ?] a bunch of Jewish policemen. They were a bunch of schmucks up there, I used to call them. They used to run after me, try to catch me. I was first in there. Some of them knew me very well. You gonna get yours. You gonna get yours. I said, you're gonna get yours, too. 

INT: What would they have done had they caught you? 

SR: Beat me up a little bit. They were a bunch of putzes. They only had a whistle and a stick, you know? Very well dressed, they thought they were something. They were noting but a bunch of bums, you know? I call them, too, bums. You know. And I had some of them I knew very well. They didn't bother me. Come on, Sol, cut that out, cut that out. You know, some of them I knew. 

INT: When you went over the wall, what did you? 

SR: I'd go over to the Aryan side, smuggle and buy different things, dealing with the Polacks. 

INT: How were you able to get-- 

SR: I was given money and go out and see them. And they took away my money many times. The Polack wouldn't deliver me the goods. I was bitter, hateful, had a grudge against them-- them. 

INT: What kind of things would you try to buy? 

SR: Ma'am? 

INT: What types of things would you try to buy? 

SR: Slonina, that is fat, grease, kielbasa, sausages, sugar-- sugar, some flour. Some, but not too much flours I used to smuggle, you know? And used to bring them money. Sometimes they wouldn't give me what they told me. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Then [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I had a case where-- the Polacks I didn't admire them very much. I was always bitter. There was an occasion one time they told me, take it or leave it. If you don't want it, the Nazis take it anyhow. Threaten me. 

INT: If you don't want what? 

SR: If I don't take what they give me. There was one occasion which I outsmarted them. I brought-- they asked me how much money you got? They want furs, you know, rings, watches. One time I jumped over. I put in the sack a fur, a black fur. Had couple watches. And I told them-- they told me what they're gonna give me. And when I gave them that they wouldn't give it to me. They say, that's it. Take and just go and be happy. And just go back to your people. I said, look-- he threatened me. I say, I know a lot of big furs I got. I got scared. For the first I was a little-- a little nervous. He was a very mean Polack. He almost like to turn me in. And I had the feeling he will-- he will do something. Then I start thinking about it, I say, you know, I got big, long furs, and I got a bunch of gold watches. Give it to me. I want to trade it. I want good stuff for that. I don't want you to give me all that little stuff. I want-- give me that grease, [? auto ?] grease, and a lot of sugar, and some cigarettes. When you can have it? I said, if you get right with me, I'm gonna bring it tomorrow. So he gave me a little bit and left. I was starting to worry about it. I thought he's really gonna turn me in. He-- he threatened me a little bit. I outsmarted, and I got away with that. I never dealt with him. Then I went on another street up there, on Moronasco Street, I think, I used to deal with some-- with some Polacks. And I knew on-- the girls, I knew, the Polish girls. Do I tell all. It's all right, tell? That's what you-- 

INT: Whatever you want to talk about. 

SR: I brought-- they told me they want gold money, American money. I had some gold money, and I was supposed to buy a lot of stuff. 

INT: Where did you get that money? 

SR: Huh? 

INT: Where did you get the money? 

SR: I got from different people, the money. 

INT: But the people were in the ghetto? 

SR: Yeah I was just a going deal. Bring me this, bring me this, bring me this. So I went one day other there, jump over, and it starts storming and-- and really, I mean, the weather was so bad, you know? I couldn't go back. They used to drive a little bit close and I have-- I was pretty strong, [INAUDIBLE] over me. And throw it-- oh, my God. And throw it over-- over that wall. Yeah, yeah. I throw over the wall and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] go into the ghetto. [DRINKS] And it was storming. I couldn't go. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the Polish family, I think her name was Kazja. The Polish family told me-- how arrogant they were. They knew my name. And they say, [NON-ENGLISH], you're not gonna be able to go home, I guess. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] We wouldn't let you go home. You are good [NON-ENGLISH]. We gonna-- we gonna let you stay-- stay overnight here. I said, that's nice from you people. I appreciate that. But I'll tell you something, that's gonna cost you, they told me, the Polacks. We want you to bring us good stuff. I said, what kind of stuff you want? Furs, they want furs. They want watches. They're gonna have plenty stuff. And I told them, I'll bring you anything you want soon. Tomorrow I'll go back to the ghetto, and I will take care of you people. You're good people. While I was sleeping, it was storming and thundering, you know? Show you how anti-Semites they were. Kazja wound up in my bed. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then how anti-Semites, then she got up and worried about Jesus going to find out how she made love to a Jewish boy. I said, how he gonna find out, Kazja? And she told me how dumb they were. The reason I'm telling you that story. She says, [? Solly, ?] you're not gonna tell Jesus. I said, no, I promise you I will never tell nobody, you know? And Kazja, that's-- she became very friendly with me, and she did mention many times and started getting very bad. Might just come over to her house. I figure, yes, to her house [INAUDIBLE], like one and one. Her parents, her brothers, and sister-- in one way looking back, they had a satisfaction how the Jews suffered. How the Jews all these years had so good and their-- really their country. And I couldn't say anything because I was on their terms, in their house, under circumstances, which I couldn't express myself the way I wanted to. Just thinking about how-- the way they were thinking, the way-- satisfaction they had in Jews. They want our blood, you know? And that's the reason I never personally had love for the Polacks. Through my young years, I witness things where a German, wouldn't-- he wouldn't be able to tell who is a Jew, who's not a Jew. The Polack used to, Zyd, Zyd. I used to go outside the ghetto, and there were lines to get bread, to get meat, sugar, shoes, or clothes. There were a lot of Jewish people, you know, which they were not-- they didn't look like-- they looked like the rest of people, you know? They were light complexion, blonde, and they stay in the line. And some-- which I, myself, stay in the line and my heart was beating, like you're beating with a hammer on an anvil. And coming, a Polack and screamed, Zyd, Zyd, Zyd. And the boy-- and the person-- and a woman jumped out of the line and started running, you know? Luckily, I didn't see no soldiers. Just to turn them in, Zyd, which-- 

INT: What would have happened if those people were caught standing in the line outside the ghetto? 

SR: I don't know what would happen. What-- I don't know this time on shooting and killing. Just occasional random thing, they used to take out some Jews and shoot them or kill them-- 

INT: Did you ever see-- 

SR: --but not en mass. 

INT: Did you ever see that happen? 

SR: Yeah, I saw that happen, you know? I've seen one time an old man was running and the Nazi hollered to him to hold. He wouldn't stop, because he was old he shot him. And I see a few more occasions like this. I've seen occasion, jump over the wall, and the Nazis scream. And he, you know, just running for his life, shot him right-- right by the wall. I've seen quite a few, but not mass-- mass murder, I did not see till I got to Treblinka. 

INT: So you knew when you jumped over the wall what potentially could happen to you? 

SR: Absolutely. Absolutely. I didn't see anything. I don't mind to tell you. 

INT: And why-- 

SR: I could jump, do things. 

INT: But knowing what could happen to you, why did you continue to go? 

SR: It was a challenge for me, to tell you the truth, to be able to do things which I wanted to do. And I was rewarded with my pride. They can not coop me up. I can go out, too, and be where I wanted to be. How the world wouldn't stop me. My ego? I don't know. Macho? I don't know. What would you call me? A lot of boys that were my age never felt that way as I feel. I always felt that way all my life. 

INT: Did you make any money? 

SR: Yes, yes, make my money and help my family. I didn't make no money. I made things like sugar, flours, eggs. One time I had all my-- my back yellow from the eggs. A lot of eggs busted on me. Never forget that. I say, I'm never gonna bring any more eggs. You know, I was running constantly. I was a pretty tough young boy. 

INT: When you went over the wall, why didn't you just keep running? Why did you keep going back to the ghetto? 

SR: I had my parents. I had my parents, my family, living still. And-- and to be-- to be-- truthfully, I did not trust the Poles. From my young age, my experience, see what they were doing, how-- the behaving from the Poles, how greedy they were, how jealous they were, how they collaborated the Nazis on occasion, which I've seen. I did not trust them. I dealt with them because it was advantage to me That thing, that was the truth. They took away furs from me. They took away money from me, everything. I still had the advantage over them. I got what I want, just have a little less. And they helped me and helped my family to survive a little longer and not to suffer as much as a lot of Jewish people have been suffering in ghetto. The streets were full of dead people starving. Their bellies were swollen. Lay in the ditches. Nobody would pick them up. Just been rounded up with a little wagon and the Jewish police then-- I don't know what it was, formerly it was a ghetto, they call it [? Shinaska. ?] It was police and they were wearing green bands on their head, and they had a whistle they [INAUDIBLE] and a little stick. And they were like collaborators. I don't know, a bunch of mamzers. I used to have a lot of different scrimmages with them. 

INT: Did you ever interact with the Nazis in the ghetto? 

SR: Huh? 

INT: Did you ever interact with the Nazis in the ghetto? Did you ever end up running errands for them or doing any work? 

SR: Yes, yes. I approached a lot of Nazis. I could speak German. I approached a lot of them to sell me gasoline, diesel, you know, petrol. They asked me why do you need the petrol? I said, at night, no electricity. I need to burn it. That was a little later. The petrol, I give it to the Jewish organization later. 

INT: To the Judenrat? 

SR: Huh? 

INT: To the Judenrat? Or-- 

SR: Not to the-- no. The Judenrat, I wouldn't give them nothing, the Judenrat. The-- the-- the-- to the underground, the Jewish underground. And-- and one occasion, I was left at wall and met a young lady and a young man, and they had a wagon full with ammunition. And we were about five, six boys and we brought that ammunition over the wall and gave it to party. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I think that woman must have been a Jewish woman. I don't know. Maybe later on she write books to help the underground, who knows? I read about Mrs. [? Meetz, ?] you know, from the Holocaust. She said she was a cutie and all. Everybody will tell you everything. I am not in New York. When I would be in New York or Washington, I'd probably be right with-- with him. What is his name? Wiesel or somebody. Nobody knows about Sol, what I did. I never told them about it. I didn't think about it, make a big deal living here. Nobody live here, survivors, just myself. I build a family and got busy trying to make a living and didn't think about getting involved in all of that. Everybody write books. They're all heroes in Warsaw ghetto. I don't remember a lot of them. I might was too young. I don't know. But I was pretty shifty little boy, did lots of things. 

INT: Could you move around the ghetto freely? 

SR: Oh, I run constantly. I run from the police. That's what my book is, Run For Your Life. I was running. I was-- Mark asked me about Umschlagplatz. I was few times at Umschlagplatz. One time I was driving the rickshaw. You know what a rickshaw is? You know, you've got to be pretty strong, two mamzers going up a rickshaw. I have to pedal them, you know? And I took one of the fellows to Umschlagplatz-- listen, Mark, that'll be interesting to you-- and I stay on the side with the rickshaw. He jumped out, a fellow from a Mercedes, black Mercedes, three of them. One was Adolf Eichmann. How many people have you met-- Adolf Eichmann. And [SPEAKING GERMAN]. You talking to me? And I stayed right there. I didn't know who they were. I've seen a lot of the SS, you know? And then Eichmann came in, [SPEAKING GERMAN], you know, to me and hit me with a glove on my face, Eichmann himself to make room. And I moved my rickshaw and-- and Eichmann, the chauffeur for Eichmann, moved in that Mercedes. Then they told me, do you realize who that is, that mamzer? That's Adolf Eichmann. I didn't know who Adolf Eichmann was [INAUDIBLE] Gestapo. To me, they all were murderers, no good bastards, you know? Went in that SS deal and that was Adolf Eichmann. That no good SOB hit me with a glove on my head. I didn't realize who he was. 

INT: When you came back from working at the Nazi commandant's house where Amy was, it was 1941. You were living in an apartment with your family in the ghetto. Were there other people in that same apartment? 

SR: Yeah, yeah. 

INT: Who else lived there? 

SR: A bunch of Jews, Jewish people, different families. Some of them worked in factories. Some of them employed, I think, [INAUDIBLE], shoes, I don't know, something like this. Making [INAUDIBLE], making uniforms, making different things. In Warsaw. I was never employed. No. 

INT: What-- what was your father's assigned job? 

SR: My father was a baker. He was making bread. For a while that didn't bother him because he was supply-- they supplied so much flours and so much, you know, for the baker, for the-- for the Juden deal, you know, for the committee, you know, the Jewish-- the Jewish, what do you call them. I forgot what they called them. Like Jewish Center, you know? And-- and they supplied the bread to different people, you know. They-- we have to deliver that. So my father, for awhile, was safe, you know? They didn't bother him till the ghetto was getting smaller and smaller. 

INT: Was your mother assigned a job? 

SR: My mother was working with my father at the baker shop. 

INT: And your sisters, were they assigned a job? 

SR: No, my sisters didn't. I think my older sister supposed to got a job, a seamstress, something like this. It never happened. I don't know whatever happened. I think she helped in the baker shop, if I'm not mistaken. I can't recall exactly. And then, 1942, September, August, really got tough. Then when they start evacuating the Jews, relocating the people. Tell them to send them away somewhere, and we believed it. I did, too. My parents, too. 

INT: You believed that people were being sent where? 

SR: I believed that they were going to relocate us, send us to factories, working. I really did believe that. There had been rumors going on they're doing [INAUDIBLE] on the Russian front and all that. They need workers, and they're gonna send all the people, relocate them or clean up Judenrat from Warsaw, you know, everybody. They were going to clean up Warsaw and leave just a small amount of people working the factories and I never was employed, no work. My mama was always worried about me. I should get in in something. I didn't-- I didn't get in nothing. I run, constantly run. And the last time I saw my mother, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when I left the house, my mother told me, [? Solly, ?] watch it, watch it. Be careful. And I kissed my mother. That's the last time I saw my mother. She was worried about me. She thought they're not gonna do nothing to the women, to the girls, just the boys. I already was a pretty good sized boy. 

INT: When was that? What year? And-- 

SR: 1942, Late '42, before they were liquidating the ghetto, relocating the people. That's when they sent them to Treblinka, my parents. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] That was a really tough time for us. They took my mother and two sisters, then my father a week later. Have so many people have to report. So many people they say they've got to have each day for transporting. And I was caught one time. I jumped the wall. There were three of us. A Ukraine had been watching us. Ukraine collaborators with the Nazis, no good bastards. He was in Umschlagplatz, watching us. 

INT: You mentioned before that the last time you saw your mother was in 1942. And she went over the wall. 

SR: She didn't went over the wall. 

INT: But you did. And when-- when you came back, what happened? 

SR: When I came back, my mother was gone. They told me-- they told me they took the women and the-- and the children. And the mans didn't go this time. And I was really hurting. And I didn't got to see my mother. Then-- about a week later, I think, they away my father. 

INT: How were you told to report? And how were you deported at that time? 

SR: I think there was assigned policemans, Jewish policemans, start talking, and speaking [INAUDIBLE] and everything, come in knocking on the buildings. You know. So many people have to report, report to this streets. And then everybody report to this streets, took the little most valuable belonging, left everything in the building. People come and rob, and-- and-- and looting, lot of Polacks came over with Germans for some reason, moving furniture-- everything out of there. A lot of German people took-- the Germans-- some of the most beautiful furniture. And take pictures-- I've seen truckloads-- paintings. And they told you, just take so much weight, so much your little belonging. How much could take? You know, [INAUDIBLE] take what you was need. You took it. You left everything. 

INT: You mentioned that your mother and your sisters were taken to Treblinka? 

SR: That's where the transport, I was told, were going this time. They went to Treblinka. 

INT: Your father? 

SR: Too went to Treblinka. 

INT: Did you ever hear of anyone seeing them at Treblinka? 

SR: No, I asked lot of them. And nobody's seen-- seen my father and mother. I knew the transport who left, a date it [INAUDIBLE], and asked people. I knew a lot of people. And a lot of people were involved with me. And they told me, the transport's gone to Treblinka. Some of them say they gone to a country where the Germans have factories. And, oh, just later on, I realized they went to Treblinka. 

INT: Were you-- 

SR: Because-- because I went to Treblinka too. 

INT: Were you, while you were in the ghetto, involved in a resistance group? 

SR: Yeah. 

INT: What was the name of it? 

SR: [? Shedosky-- ?] I forgot what you called that-- [? Shedosky. ?] [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I [? was in ?] the underground. I was not involved yet. I was involved when I came back from Treblinka. 

INT: OK. 

SR: I was not involved. I'm wrong. 

INT: OK. 

SR: I was not involved. 

INT: So then-- 

SR: I knew something going on, but I-- I didn't knew exactly what was going on. I was driving the rickshaw, and I was carrying a German-- two German soldiers. One of them got off. And one of them was-- I still was carrying him. And while I was carrying him, he was supposed to report to one of the factories. And he got a little nasty with me and told me to go to a little faster. And it was a little hilly, so now I was tired to peddle. And I said, I cannot do. And he turned around, and like, be slapping me, you know-- go faster. So I-- I had a safety pin, and I made a hole in the tire. The tire went out. I said, this is kaput. He said, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. I say, it's kaput. I don't know how to fix it. And to who you talking? I said, I'm talking to you, you no good SOB, I told him. I said, I'm gonna beat the crap out of you. I got enough of you. Who you think you are? I got really mad and got to the point which I couldn't take it anymore. And my blood, it just turned on me. And I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was-- I knew what I was doing. I just spill my-- all my bitterness what I had against him. And he was a little skinny guy. And I tell him, I'm gonna beat the crap out of you. I got tired of you. And you been beating me, calling me name. Who you think you are, you people-- no good bastards, Nazis? He say, one day, you gonna get you, what he said. And he start going a little bit back. And I thought he my try jump get is gun. Before he jump his gun, I hit him. And he fell down. While he fell down, he starts crying and screaming not to hurt me. And I took away his gun. I took away his gun. I had him pretty good person. I seen blood all over him. I was strong, very strong. And strong-- and from fear, my strength-- I had twice so much strength what I usually would have. And he was begging me not to kill him. And I'll told him, I would not shoot you. I would not do like you bastards, no-good Nazis. I said, we Jews got more pride in human being than you. He say, he's a good one. He never hurt nobody. He apologized, shouldn't be so mean to me-- and all, and don't kill me. Don't kill me. I say, I'm not gonna kill you, you know. And I remember, I kicked him couple times more. And I ran away. And I ran away. And I met a friend of mine. He'd been telling me-- and I told him this story, what happened. And I took the gun in a-- in a building-- bombed-out building. And I hid him in the cellar on the brick. And a friend of mine-- and I told him that. And he came back to me, morning, and told me, his cousin, his brother, going over to the [? Aryan ?] side. And they get sometimes funny with the money. He'd like to have a protection. So I don't mind to sell him that gun? You know. And I said, I-- I wouldn't sell it to you, if you want it bad. Then we travel, went to the place. And I picked up that gun and give it to him. I didn't realize that he was working for the resistance. Later on, he told me. You know where the gun went? It went to the resistance. I said, I'm glad you didn't pay me for that. I would feel bad about that, you know. That time, I-- I-- I didn't know it even. 

INT: But at this point, you were still in the Warsaw ghetto? 

SR: Warsaw ghetto. 

INT: And so you-- after your parents were taken, you stayed in the ghetto and-- and rode the rickshaw? 

SR: I still was run rickshaw, ran around like a wild man from one place to another place. I think I went to-- over to the Aryan side maybe once, I think. I think. 

INT: Were there deportations every day? 

SR: Huh? 

INT: Were they-- were they still deporting people from the ghetto at that time? 

SR: Yeah. Every day, they were deporting. I was constantly running. They've been chasing me-- running until they caught me one day. Beat me up-- and two of them carry me on Umschlagplatz. It was late-- the reason I know the date, that was late December, 1942. And they put me in the railroad car in Umschlagplatz. Couldn't run away. I run away a few times. They caught up with me. And all my friends up say, say, boy, Sol, your luck run out. I say, it did run out. And when I went to Umschlagplatz, they shipped me. And believe or not, there's only maybe 75 kilometer is Treblinka from Warsaw. And we were traveling all day, you know, all day. Every few miles, the Polacks stop, put water in, you know, and all that crap, you know. And there were Ukrainians sitting on the caboose watching us. You know. And when I came in to Treblinka, then I realized what's going on and what happened to our people. When they open the doors from the railroad cars, I should never seen that-- that screaming, that hollering, that whooping, beating, womens taking away their children, children falling down, womens falling down. They God damn Ukrainians, they're the worst people in the world-- howling, whipping, calling, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]-- you know, hitting, blood flying all over. And when I got out, I saw my friend Monek. He was a good friend. And he was about a year older than I was. Solly, throw your hat away. I was wearing a little hat. Throw your hat away, and do what I'm doing. And I throw my hat away. And I was doing what he's doing, just picking up stuff, picking up stuff. And honey, I could see what happened to my parents-- my mother and my sister-- beating, hollering, screaming, Mama, Mama, Mama, children crying, running them into that-- to that-- to that gate. They run them in. Brought them into the gate, throw them in and-- and places, and taking them baths, showers-- I could smell burning people. And I say, Monek, what's going on? Solly, it's bad. They brand our people. They burn them. I said, my gosh. And my heart was beating like a hammer. I said, that's what they do to my mother, and my sisters, my father. I knew where I was. And I said, Monek, well, we got to do something about it. We-- we gonna be next. I only stayed two days in Treblinka. And that was between Christmas and New Year. The Ukrainian were drinking, smiling, laughing, singing, taking away rings from people, beating, murders-- like the Nazis, worse than some-- like the SS-- terrible people. You know, you read about-- they got that Ivan-- Ivan the Terrible. You now in Israel, they let him loose. All these son of a bitches were like Ivan. The whole lot were terrible. None of them was good-- bunch of no-good bastards-- you beating up people, murdering, killing them, screaming. I said, my gosh, what are we going to do? We got to do something. We gotta-- people in Warsaw still have the Jews-- they don't know what's going on. I said, we got to do something. He said, what you want to do, Sol? And I told Monek, I said, look, you see the Ukrainians? They're drinking. Cold was-- very cold was. The Ukrainians drinking. And when they transport everybody out, we went on the car and clean up everything. And I say, we ought to stay in the car. The Ukrainians don't look into the inside. They're too damn drunk, the bastards. And see, we can go back to Warsaw. He say, you think we can? I say, yes. And he say, I'll tell you something. I got another fellow. I still today don't remember his name. He say he knew Warsaw pretty good. And he was older than us, maybe 10 years older than us. And he say and he knew Warsaw, where to jump, how to jump. He knew the territory. So three of us, one day, like afternoon when was dark-ish, clean up the car. We stay in the car with the hands up to the wall, all three of us, and waiting for the cars to move of that Treblinka-- out of that railroad station. It was not a railroad station. It was just like a track to go in to the concentration camp-- not concentration, to the crematorium. That's the right word. And believe or not, after half a hour, something like this, we could listen Russians speaking, you know. [SPEAKING RUSSIAN]-- and seeing he shut the door, and didn't look-- nothing, not even shut it good, the door. And they went back to the caboose and sit down. We could hear him talking Russian. And before we know it, we could hear ch ch ch ch, the train start moving. And we were moving. And the older fellow, friend, he told us we gonna have to jump the train. And we cannot jump in Warsaw. We have to jump before Warsaw a few kilometers. And he gonna let us know how to jump too. He told Monek he say, you've got to wait and watch. He studied that. When it's a little hill down, you got to jump and start rolling. Not-- you cannot jump out on the flat ground, because you're going to break your legs. And I-- I-- I thought that he was right. Because as a young boy-- still was a young boy-- when the street cars used to in Warsaw running, then the conductor come, I used to jump off the train. Train was going pretty fast. And I knew I have to follow going with the train. I cannot jump behind but not-- you know, you get hurt. And that was a flat ground. It made sense to me what he told us. And we made all plans. And believe or not, they stopped many times. The Ukrainians going up-- I'll watched through the-- through the little holes in the train drinking vodka, and joking, and smiling. Then the train start and pull over again and keep going. Then he give us order to jump. It was snowy, icy. And he say, jump now. And we all start jumping. I start putting my head down. I start rolling, rolling, rolling, rolling, rolling till I got to a stop. And there were three of us. And the older fella, my Monek's friend, he was a little hurt in his hips very bad. Then I took over. And I told him, you know, Monek, three of us-- one of them got to make it back to Warsaw and tell our people what's going on. They're murdering our people. They killing our people. They burning our people, gassing our-- we got to tell the rest of few Jews what's left what's going on. I didn't know nothing about resistant. We form a resistance group. I didn't know. Until Anielewicz, I didn't know nothing about that. I was wondering why nobody ever told me. Because I was involved in my [? cabbie ?] [INAUDIBLE]. I guess I constantly been running, running. People knew me everybody. Here comes Sol, got your [INAUDIBLE]. Got your [INAUDIBLE]. You know, running. And I was really surprise nobody ever told me that. And took me a long time to get back to Warsaw. I think I was about 8 kilometer until Warsaw. It took me a long time. I went to another Polack. They run me out. It's a whole story, I can say, how I stayed. It took me a couple days to get back. 

INT: How long were you on the train from Treblinka? 

SR: Quite a few hours. 

INT: And-- and did you know that that train was gonna go to Warsaw? Or did you know where it was going to go? 

SR: He knew it. They-- they-- they'd been coming from Warsaw to Treblinka, from Warsaw to Treblinka-- the same train. 

INT: Were you ever processed at Treblinka? Did you ever get a number or-- 

SR: No, I ain't get nothing. Absolute-- they didn't know I exist. They just-- it was one, the commanders. It was I guess the commander that was my friend. We picked up [? lagers, ?] put on the pile, then put the clothes, run behind where the damn Ukrainians where I could see. They had a barrack over there too-- like little hillish. I could still remember. 

INT: Your friend, though, had been processed. 

SR: Yeah, he was working there. 

INT: OK. 

SR: He'd been there for-- for a month. 

INT: And his name was-- 

SR: Monek. 

INT: And his last name? 

SR: Oh, I don't know. I don't know. 

INT: So how-- so you got back to Warsaw-- 

SR: When I jump the train, got back to Warsaw, I got off on the street. I came in like 5 o'clock or something like this. I can't recall exactly-- 4 o'clock, 5 o'clock, 3 o'clock, or 5:30. When the people were got out from the work-- you know, they were still working some Jews in the factories. And then start getting-- people start getting in the street. And when I jumped, everyone start walking, I didn't know. I want to see some of my friends going on there. Here I met Jakobovitch. I met Jakobovitch, and I told that story, what happened. He say, you just came back? I say, yeah. I just came back. 

INT: And he was-- 

SR: He was with the resistant. 

INT: Did you know that when you told him the story? 

SR: No. I didn't-- I didn't know nothing about it-- till-- till I tell you what happened. So I told him. And he say, you just came back? I told him how many. I said, and they burnt our people, that they're gassing up to womens and children, beating-- the Ukrainians and the SS-- unbelievable. That's when they-- and you could see some Estonian too-- some Estonian-- not Estonian, Lithuanians. Lithuanians-- they're wearing black uniforms, too, bastards-- and SS. And I told Jakobovitch everything. And he [INAUDIBLE] how many? And I told him how many of two of us. I don't know, so you know Monek-- he remember him too. 

INT: And the third man? 

SR: To tell you, I never knew his name. He told me something. I can't-- 

INT: But you left him with the broken-- 

SR: I want to tell you. I didn't told you that. Then we got out of the train, right up there in that snowy thing, I said, fellas, then I took it over. I say, one of us got to make back to Warsaw. I don't think would be healthy to travel three of us. One of them have a chance to make it. So we split. Till today, I never seen none of them. In all the concentration camp I've been, I never seen none of them. I don't know whatever happened to them. 

INT: But-- but one-- but your friend came back to the ghetto with you? 

SR: No. 

INT: No, he didn't-- OK. 

SR: Never seen them, never seen them anymore. 

INT: OK. 

SR: So I told Jakobovitch. He was in ghetto. He was working in some of the factories, I think [? Tabot's, ?] and then worked for the underground, for the resistant group. And I told him. He says, Solly, I want to take you somewhere, and show you something. So he took me on a [? Lefki. ?] Who went around the Miller Street, went to canals-- not canals, tunnels, tunnels back and forth. And there was room was laying two machine guns. And I light a candle light. And I don't know if the telephone work or not, you know, a telephone where you turn. And was a few mens and one woman. And he say, I want to-- I want you to meet Mr. Anielewicz. A young boy-- he told me, Mr. Anielewicz, a young boy. That's where I met Mordechai Anielewicz, the Jewish commander of the resistance. I think I might cry, I met him. As a young boy, the way he talked to me, told me, you know, how they're gonna be in touch with me. [DRINKS] I told him, I want to take part. I want to be something. I was so eager to join them, to do something special. A revolutionary boy I was, I could hardly wait. I was so eager. And he said they'd be in touch with me. So my job was to collect milk cans, and bottles, petrol. And one occasion, we went over the wall and met a young woman and a man had sacks with ammunition. I think they were Jews. I don't know. Today I think about-- not today, years back, I've been thinking about them. I think they were Jews. They must been somewhere organizing something. And we brought the ammunition over. And I think, when I'm not mistaken, I took it to Miller Street, when I'm not mistaken. 

INT: And what was there on Miller Street? 

SR: Then we brought it in. And they picked it up, some of the guys, older guys. And we-- [NON-ENGLISH], you know, I call it. They were involved in the intelligence, you know. They picked it up-- the ammunition. And then I was assigned to go into bakery shop to bake hard bread, very hard bread. 

INT: To bake the bread or to get the bread? 

SR: To pick up from the bakery shop, where a bunch of boys was-- and that was my job. And I did a bunch of that, and bottles, and petrol. And-- 

INT: What did they do with the bottles and the petrol? 

SR: Put in petrol and put-- make molotov cocktails. We had plenty then. I always call it a Jewish cocktails. We made it. It's a fellow named-- he was us a chemist, a druggist he was, I think. His name was [? Cansuper, ?] something like this. He was a little older fellow, a little grayish on the side-- not much, a little grayish on the side. He was in control and everything. And I was very eager to do more. I want to learn how to shoot. They didn't have enough guns. They need people like me to do other things. So I was involved in the-- in the uprising in Warsaw ghetto. And I was assigned a few more boys to organize the ammunition. And when all them get killed-- our boys or the German-- I should be able to recover the ammunition and bring it back. Because I was fast and quick, then give it them. You know. And-- so that's what I was doing. And the tanks came in, got burn up. And half a truck Germans got shot. I jumped on them, took away the guns, took away the helmet, the knife. 

INT: Were you hurt at all? 

SR: Huh? 

INT: Were you hurt at all? 

SR: I was not hurt. And-- and a few of them still was alive, you know, the Nazis-- crying not to kill me, not to kill me. We took it away everything. And I-- 

INT: Where'd you take the weapons back to? 

SR: Huh? 

INT: Where did you take the weapons? 

SR: To our people, to our people-- and I took one helmet away. Never forget get that. I wouldn't give it. I want to wear that helmet. I scratched that swastika, and I put a David star on there. Boy, I was proud. I thought we won the war. I'm not kidding. When the General Stroop, that no-good mamzer, he sent one after another one. We were fighting street by street. What can I tell you? People been-- they set the Warsaw ghetto on fire, like inferno. Everything was burning. People who didn't even took part in that uprising were hidden in the buildings, build rooms, they jumped from the windows, you know. And outside, you could see a window [INAUDIBLE]. When you come into the building, was building-- people make like bunkers, you know, closed in, hidden. People been jumping from the balconies. People been jumping from the windows. They been burn in the streets. What can I tell you, honey? You wouldn't believe it. The whole city-- the whole-- I thought the whole world is burning in my young mind. I said, my gosh, well, that's gonna be. Everything is in a fire. Burning, people jumping-- man then they came in with tanks, too, again, and bomb, cannons. Every building, after they-- they-- they set a fire the Warsaw ghetto, was still going on sporadic fighting-- not much. You know. And end of April, and-- and 1st May-- May it was-- they would give us a whipping. They-- they-- a lot of them run away to the outside the ghetto. 

INT: A lot of the Jews ran away from the ghetto? 

SR: Yeah, to the partisans. And I think they caught me May the 5th, almost to the end. They caught me. They caught me. They-- we were in the sewer. You know. And they starting throwing in gas, they were talking about, in the sewer. I-- I-- I don't remember was gas. And some older people-- we were just boys. Some older people told us to take some the clothes off, and use urine-- urine. And put it on the nose so we could breathe. You know. I did what they told me. I did not know medical technology or anything about that, what is good or not. I did what they told us. And before you know, they were screaming and hollering. And even they got some Jews for the capture. And they been hollering, screaming, come out, don't be scared, ain't not nobody hear, you know, and all that stuff, you know. Some of them we didn't listen. And some of them-- we just-- we just got out. 

INT: You'd said that, I joined the resistance. Do you know approximately the dates that you were involved with the resistance? 

SR: Yeah. On about-- I came out and away from Treblinka almost New Year, I think. When I'm done-- a day before New Year. 

INT: And the year was? 

SR: 1943. So you see, then I spent a couple days running till I got into the ghetto back. So I actually I started probably January till April-- only a few months. You know. 

INT: And you were saying that you were running in the sewer? 

SR: Yeah. When I was running in the sewer, we came out the sewer. 

INT: Were you still in the ghetto when you came out of the sewer? 

SR: In ghetto. SS told us we were-- I know where we were. We were between the [? Lefke ?] and Miller Street. We got out. He told us to keep your hands up. SS. Young SS, mean bastards. Told us to sit down, you know, with the feet crossed, with the hands up. There must have been maybe 15 of us. There was one young lady, and she was wearing-- I'll never forget-- a big, long leather coat. And-- and a young man, too. And the SS turned around and say, you must be-- he must be that [GERMAN]. [SPEAKING GERMAN]. You must be the leader, to that girl. He shot her on the spot. 

INT: Do you know her name? 

SR: Huh? No. And-- and they shot that young man on the spot. You must be-- he must be the leader. Two of them right on the spot. And he hold the machine gun, trigger happy. And he interrogated everyone of us. He came to me and said, what you been doing in the sewer? How many Germans did you kill? I said, I don't know how to shoot, officer. I'm just a [SPEAKING GERMAN]. I've never held a gun. He said to me, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. You know, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. I said, my people came from Germany. Well, you're not a German. You're a Juden. I say, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. I'm a Juden. [GERMAN] That's what I want to get straight. You're not a German. You're a Juden. I say, [GERMAN] Yeah. [SPEAKING GERMAN] And he hold his machine gun out. I thought he's going to shoot me. He hold the machine gun and spray the bullets right down our feet. You know, I thought he really-- he really-- saying that's it. He's going to shoot us. A young SS, young fella, a couple more goons. Everyone of them starting to shoot. Trigger happy. 

INT: Was anyone killed or hurt? 

SR: No. Just the two. That girl and that boy. He shot them right on the spot. And I had a watch, a golden watch, with a chain given to me. And it was not mine, you know. In the war, when the family ran for others, you know, aunt give you gold, different places to distribute it. And in my own mind, I thought about-- I kept my hands up on my head and with one hand I took that watch up and put it on the ground. And put back my hand. And-- and I dig a little bitty hole and buried that watch in the ground. I didn't want him to find the watch on me, because he shot the two people-- leaders, you know. I figure he might think I wear a watch. I must be a leader or something, too. And then came-- they brought in a couple more Jews from somewhere. And they put us on a-- on a truck and took us to Umschlagplatz. That's when I went to Treblinka. 

INT: So you went back to Treblinka a second time? 

SR: No. They took us on the truck, and we are supposed to enter Treblinka. They switched it, and they say we're going to Auschwitz. Then instead to Auschwitz, some kind of transportation screwed up some railroad-- that's what you hear talking. And they took us to Majdanek. 

INT: So you went by truck from-- 

SR: To Umschlagplatz. 

INT: And then from-- 

SR: Then put us in the cars and sent us to Majdanek. 

INT: How many people were in the cars with you? 

SR: A lot of people were. 

INT: So were they liquidating the Warsaw ghetto at this time? 

SR: There was nobody left. Nobody left. 

INT: Where the only people in the car-- 

SR: I think we were the last people. 

INT: The only people in the car were people who-- who were at the Warsaw uprising? 

SR: Some of them were not uprising. Some of them were hidden. Some of them in the cellars, I don't know. Some of them didn't took no part. And I think we were the last ones. When I was in Majdanek, I think in June, news came out. General Stroop completely destroyed the ghetto and killed all of them who were hidden between them [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] and all the leaders, officers with him. I heard the news in Majdanek. I think in about in June, I think. 

INT: How did you hear that news? 

SR: You know, word from one concentration camp. From-- they call us [NON-ENGLISH] We were all marked [NON-ENGLISH]. Because of the [NON-ENGLISH]. You know, a mark with a painted thing. And one of the [NON-ENGLISH]. That's what we talked between us, told us. They went in and destroyed everything. Dynamite the whole city. And that's where Anielewicz got destroyed. Then in Majdanek, that was the worst thing I ever been to. They beat us, run us, the worst thing. They just-- actually, luck from God. How can a person survive Majdanek? It's unbelievable. We were sent on field four. They carried me over there. They was kapos over there. There were two Jewish kapos. One of them was-- I hate to tell the what happened, what our own people did. We were supposed to tell them like it was. That's what you want to know. And one of them was named Moshe Toffy, a Jewish person. And another one was Naftula Guzler. Naftula Guzler-- Guzler mean in Yiddish, murder. And he was a Czech, a blonde. We called him the Blondie, we used to call him. They were very big boys. They beat us-- terrible thing. 

INT: Why would they beat you? 

SR: The SS and the murderers gave them a little more to eat, drinking water, vodka-- vodka. They thought they probably go home, survive and the rest of them gonna die. They had a better life there. They-- I think they were homosexual, too. They were so mean. One day, I went in, I had a little canteen. Try to get some food, they'd been serving. Moshe Toffy was serving. And he had in one hand a whip and in one hand that big spoon. What do you called that, where you get soup? A big spoon. And he pour in and then pour in everything but half of it in the cantina. I said, why don't you pour me the rest of me? He hit with a whip on my head. I said, why you do things? I was supposed to get that. He hit me again and again. And my friend said, Solly, don't be stupid. Get away. It's not worth it for that little soup. He's gonna kill you, you know. And my face was bloody. You know, and I got away. Next time, I went again to get a little soup when he was serving. He poured a little bit in it, too. So I didn't say nothing and walked away, and he hit me with that whip, you know, like to come back and poured the rest of the soup-- sadist. Poured the rest of the soup. He wanted to try me and see what I'm gonna say. A sadist. No good. He was very mean. They give us Holland shoes and make us run all day. In June, July, they didn't shave our hair at Majdanek. They didn't cut our hair. They shave our hair. And you know, they were not barbers. They cut you all over. And then you have to take a dip in the jacuzzi for lousing and un-lousing. You couldn't get out of this. The screaming and hollering. You could hear in the seventh heaven, screaming. You know, that's alcohol and cut your body. Cut you everywhere. Then they give us the Holland shoe. That was a terrible thing. Make us run on that. 

INT: Where were you running to? 

SR: Running on the field. Back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. [NON-ENGLISH] Take you-- they'd been punishing myself, punishing us. 

INT: Why were you punished? 

SR: I think we were from Warsaw ghetto. I don't know. I think we're supposed to be they call us the tough guys and all of that stuff. Beating us, punishing us, running. They call it in German, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. I don't know what that even was. [GERMAN] I knew the word, [GERMAN], but I didn't know what it was. They had beaten us constantly, running. One day we were carrying stones just-- just to carry. Make us work on something. And it was so hot in July. 

INT: What did you wear? Did they let you keep your own clothes? 

SR: No, no. They give us some other clothes, you know, and the Holland shoes. They took away everything from us. And no underwear, nothing. And it was so hot in July you almost die running, constantly running. And I went in by the barrack on the side and just tried to take a rest a second. And on the kapos, I don't know, some of them just sitting like you know taking just a brief nap. And took my number. At night, every night, they called people on the field. People who don't look straight, don't look right, who hardly ever do something wrong. Today thinking they did wrong, and at night they count the people and they punish with punishment. So at night was going on everything at about 5 o'clock. So they had a big old table like a guillotine. You put your head in and your head outside, and you get whipping. So they called my number a couple times. But I didn't know I did nothing wrong, you know. So I called again and they knew I'm in that barrack, I think 21. And they called me, and that's you, Sol. And I jumped out on the field. And they put my head inside that guillotine with the [? hands ?] [? up ?] are, and I'd been getting whipping. On each side one with a whip. 

INT: How long would those last? 

SR: I think they gave me about 50 lashes, I don't know. 

INT: And it was always across your back? 

SR: On my seat, you know. Felt maybe seven, eight. Then I make a mess of my pants. I don't remember. Then they open the latch, they put me on the ground, and my friends took me where my barrack was, you know. And I was unconscious, knocked out. And I had some good friends, too, from-- from-- I knew from Warsaw. And they put water on me. But there was no ice for it, just regular water. And the next day I was blue, green, yellow. I could hardly straighten myself up. I suffered so bad. I couldn't eat. I must of had fever. I was skinny. But still wouldn't, you know, wouldn't give in. 

INT: Were you still expected to show up at appel? Or-- 

SR: At the appel still. I could hardly walk. My friends picked me up. I could hardly walk. And I'd been carrying stones. Couldn't run because I'm scared they'll take me to crematorium. I'd been biting my teeth, my lips. My friends been helping me, try to keep me between. And they been putting water in the-- in the-- on me, and I almost-- people thought I'd just any hour die. And I was laying in the barracks, couldn't eat. And my friends standing around behind my bed. And they'd been telling me, you know, Sol, nobody gonna make it out of that concentration. All of 'em gonna be dead. One of them going to die early, one of them going to die late. They tried comfort me, make me feel good. They're gonna die too. I say, wait a minute. Look, I'm not die-- dead yet. I just refuse to die. I think I'm gonna fight until my last breath. I'm not gonna just lay down and die. I wanted to live. And I-- and I'm a fight. And they're like, no. What do you all I think, I told them. You think I'm dying or? Oh, no, no, no. We all are not going to make it. I said, I feel different. So long as my eyes is opened still, I got a chance. And I was getting a little bit better and better. Then start and coming transport. The Germans from the Russian front somewhere. And-- 

INT: They were bringing the Germans? 

SR: The Germans. 

INT: In? 

SR: Not in my field. Another field. I think field two, I think, when I'm not mistaken. There were big barracks, red cross on it. And they were needing some workers. And I want to say they're gonna have to unload them. Is anybody speaking Deutche? I said, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. Oh, come with me. Come with me. You speak German. So I went, and we unloading from railroad cars. It was not like railroad cars like we got in to Majdanek. It was passenger cars. And we put them, [? came ?] [? in. ?] A lot of them with frozen noses, and ears, and I don't know what hospital they come in. I don't think they came from the front by the way. 

INT: So these were Russians that were coming? 

SR: No, Germans. 

INT: Germans bring brought into Majdanek for-- 

SR: They brought them in. 

INT: For-- for medical treatment? 

SR: For medical treatment-- 

INT: OK. 

SR: --they'd been bringing them in. And he helped me a little bit to get on my feet. One of them would say, [SPEAKING GERMAN] cigarette. You know, light a cigarette. I'd give him one. I took one for me. [SPEAKING GERMAN], you know? I give him [GERMAN], you know, candy. He got one, I took for me one. A little bread, a little cake. [GERMAN] [INAUDIBLE] That's good. That's very good. I give them a little [GERMAN]. And I fed him-- I fed myself, and him, fed him. 

INT: What was it like to take care of the Nazis? 

SR: I felt good. I was lucky. I was-- I had a satisfaction in them. And then-- and I used to say, I hope you all are bastards look like this. You know, I talk to myself. You know. And that helped me. You know, and I took away a few cigarettes, and brought it to the barracks, and swap it for bread, swap it for potatoes. You know. And that helped me a little bit to get on my feet. You know. Then after not too long, we marching again on the field over there. And my feet from running were bloody. 

INT: Were these wooden clogs that you had on? 

SR: Wooden boots. Wooden Holland shoes. And my feet from the bi-step, you know, right here, blood all over. Just from the wood running from stones. We were on our feet very-- very bloody. And then one day we hear on-- on the speaker, all the people out from the barracks and take all the clothes off. Came in a car, a big old Mercedes with three fat SS came in. And told everybody to get naked, you know, take your clothes off, they're going to segregate people. That's what I thought they were doing. 

INT: Was it a selection? 

SR: A selection. Some people look good, some of them to the [GERMAN], some to the left. They're gonna get the strong ones out. And I came in, and I see one of the SS look at my feet and told, [GERMAN]. You know, he didn't want me. And somewhere I sneaked out. From there I realized he looked at my feet, and I was seeing all skinny boys and people a little older they were taking where I was going. And on the right was all the little healthy boys going. So I sneaked out there and jumped. Damn it, I did it again. Oh-- 

CREW: It's OK. 
SR: Leave it alone. 

CREW: I'll get it. 
SR: Right here you got that. How do you like that? Isn't it something. [DRINKS] 

INT: So-- 

SR: So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] right here. And I sneaked out again, and I went around on the side by the barracks and cleaned my feet from the blood. Listen there, as a young boy I realized what was wrong with me. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I went back to the selection. And I picked my hand up. And I told him in German, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. 

INT: What does that mean? 

SR: I want to work for the Germans. I'm a good worker. And he said, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. Very good, he said to me. And I went on this transport. That's-- and the people who didn't make it they took to the crematorium, you know, who were selected. 

INT: At Majdanek? 

SR: At Majdanek. And they put us on the railroad cars, and they send us to ammunition factory to Skarzysko. 

INT: And where was that located? 

SR: In Poland. They took us there. There was three factories over there. There was A, B, and C. The C factory was-- they'd been making dynamites. And there was sulfur over there. And when I came into that camp, they called it, I've seen all the yellow people. I got scared looking. And that's where I was, working in the ammunition factory. 

INT: And why were the people yellow? 

SR: From that sulfur. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then-- not so much I think happened over there in that Skarzysko. And I was working in the ammunition factory. And-- 

INT: You were making dynamite? 

SR: Dynamites. And the Nazi, the SS, the Commander Snyder he liked me very much. I helped them keep bookkeeping cart on everything, on the dynamites. And then I became in the transport picking up the dynamites from different shops and put them in the boxes. And then he report, and locked it, and sent it on the front line. Half of the dynamites were no good. I checked them. I made sure they're no good. 

INT: How could you tell if they were any good or not? 

SR: I was supposed to test them. I had an object to test them. Some of them were not even screws inside. Nothing. I put them in the box, close them up. I told them, all is good. Very good, you know. And I guess-- I don't know. I didn't realize the consequences of what could happen when I get caught. And some of the people who had been making the dynamite. On special night, they were hungry, they couldn't make that many. And they're supposed to make, I think, 120-- I can't recall-- in a box. And they made it 80, 90. I finagled, put on top, and locked up the box. I was in charge of that. And then we test them, too. I used to go out with Snyder and test them. Set them up. 10, 12, eight, seven. Most of them-- some of them didn't explode. I told him they're good, and he believed me. You know. What I was telling him, he believed me. And I had that satisfaction to get back on him, which I didn't even realize what I was doing. 

INT: What was the risk to you? 

SR: Oh, my life. Shoot me pieces. A hundred times they would have shot me. I guess the Allies are only something. I didn't even realize that. You know, to do things what I was doing. Shipping everything on the front line. Most of them were no good. You know, and he trust me. I had a lot of things over him. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] How much more time we got? You want me tell you some more things? 

INT: Well, tell me this first. How long were you at Majdanek? 

SR: In Majdanek, a few months. 

INT: Starting what dates? 

SR: I came in-- if I'm not mistaken, I came in May. I think they caught me in Warsaw, May the 4th, the 5th. I don't know exactly, honey. 

INT: And you left? 

SR: No. That-- that's when they shipped me to Majdanek. 

INT: And you left Majdanek? 

SR: I left Majdanek-- I knew we were so hot. We-- the heads were swollen, sticking out like this from the heat. Standing hours on the appel field. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] June, July, August. I don't know. A few months there. 

INT: And when did you leave Skarzysko? 

SR: Skarzysko? 

INT: When-- when did you leave there? 

SR: At Skarzysko? 

INT: Mhm. 

SR: I think 1944. They used to take all of them. They'd been like evacuating that concentration camp. I got in the scrimmage for [? larder, ?] and I almost got shot in Skarzysko. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I was working in the ammunition factory and loading railroad cars. There was a big warehouse. And I asked Snyder so I can go pick some berries. We were in the woods. Camouflaged the factory. He told me, yes. And I went in and start picking some berries. Before you know it, I'm seeing somebody cock the gun. A Ukrainian. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. I started running. And I was running. And luckily, he didn't shoot me. You know, he was shooting. He didn't-- didn't catch me. And I got in back to the warehouse and Snyder jumped out of his office. [SPEAKING GERMAN] And I told him. You told me to go and pick berries. And the Ukrainian say he try to catch me. The Ukrainian what he was staying with me and holding me to go with him. He spoke to me in Russian to go with me to the warehouse, to the post. You know, report me. And Snyder said, [GERMAN]. What's going on? I say, he told me. You told me-- am I still to go and pick some berries? And he said, you don't have no right. The Germans don't have a right to do nothing here. They're in charge. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And I translate everything. He say, you just-- just a puppet here and something like this. And before you know it, I'm antagonizing the two of them. They had a big fight, a fist fight. While they was fist fighting and laying on the floor, the Ukrainian was a little stronger. And then and I tried like to separate them. And every time I separated them I hit him, you know, the Ukrainian. Hit him again and hit him again. And before you know it, I jump into the telephone and call for help. And came in a bunch of SS with motorcycle. What's going on? And I told him the Ukrainian had been fighting us [NON-ENGLISH]. He called them names, different names. And they took the Ukrainian away. And when I got back to the barracks, they came was the commander from the camp, was a Jewish fellow. Husband and wife-- did you ever see some crazy thing? Mr. Markowicz and Mrs. Markowicz. They were running the Jewish camp. And he told them-- 

INT: They were kapos? 

SR: Even worse. They were commanders in that camp. 

INT: They weren't SS though. 

SR: In Skarzysko. And they told me, you did lots of things. You-- you-- I said, I did nothing. I just used the telephone and called. They'd been fighting. He said, you antagonized everything. I said, Mr. Markowicz, not me. You've got it wrong. And he say-- [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. He was from Plock, I think. From a little city, she and him, I think. And-- 

INT: You were talking about after Ukrainian and the German had the fight. 

SR: Mr. Markowicz, the commander, told me you'd better watch it, watching to trying to antagonizing you and-- and the factory up there. I said Mr. Markowicz-- I called him mister. I was just a boy. He was and older person, wear good clothes. He thought he's gonna survive. He was in cahoots with all the-- with all the bad boys. He had a girlfriend. His wife had a boyfriend. I'm telling you they had a family affair up there in Skarzysko. They were eating good, living good, drinking, you know. And I said, Mr. Markowicz, I got nothing to do. So the next day, I put out a way to get back to work. And I told Snyder, [INAUDIBLE], I did tell him there. He threatened me. I get in trouble. He said, you're not gonna get in trouble. Don't worry about it. They're gonna get in trouble. Nobody gonna hurt you or do something to you. You know. And there was another chief from the factory, Walter-- mean SOB. Snyder told them, told Walter what I was doing, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you wouldn't believe it-- I tell you something-- but they were fighting. He told Walter-- that's the real name-- he told Walter, Solly-- he called me Solly-- why the Ukrainian were on top trying to hit him, Solly been kicking them and hitting him and pulling his hand away so I could get them. And Walter started laughing. You know, he stated laughing. He called me. He wasn't mean, he hit me a few times pretty good. He called me come [? ze ?] here, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. He spoke to me in German. [SPEAKING GERMAN] and shake with me. I got scared to put my hand out, you know. Because Snyder told him what I was doing. You know. And I did the right thing to call for help, you know, because the Ukrainian was stronger than Synder. So he-- Snyder called-- told [? Neumann, ?] the policemen, who'd been bringing in from the camp to the factory. His name was [? Neumann, ?] real name [? Neumann. ?] He was a no good  bastard, too. And he told them to tell everybody in the camp how Solly got nothing to do with [INAUDIBLE], you know, just not to start, not to give him trouble because, you know, surely, he is not-- he got nothing to do. It's between him and the Ukrainian. And I start worrying about it a little bit. Not exactly a scared of us, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] thinking about something. And was when I got to the camp, Markowicz looked me, you know, over, you know, like this. You know. Figured you SOB, I give it you or something like that. He just looking. He's mean look on me. He never did bother me. Then, when the Russians starting approaching, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you know, they're starting evacuating the concentration camp. 

INT: And that was in, what was the date? 

SR: 1944. I don't know, honey. I don't know. Early 1944. I don't know. 

INT: And how were you evacuated? 

SR: That's what I want to tell you. And they took all of the canarian. The called us canarian. We were yellow from the sulfur-- my nose, my eyes. And some of the them would work with the bombs, another bomb. They were not so yellow as I was handling that powder all the time. And so I've seen what's going on. Take one of them, another one. You know. I said my gosh, what's going on here. And I realized they looked at the way to look on the faces. So where me and [? Drago ?] was, the barber shop in the kitchen, they had a bunch of chimney up there. I don't know what it was doing up there, cooking something. And there were bricks of the red bricks. And I took the red brick on my hand and put it all over my face, on my-- on my hand, everywhere. So I was a little reddish looking, not yellow-ish looking. 

INT: What did they do with the canarians? 

SR: They didn't live long. They probably killed you. You know. Do you realize, my wife had been telling me after we got married for quite a few years, for quite a few years, when I used to-- my clothes was yellow when I sweat. Tola been telling me for quite a few years, Sol, everything was yellow. Especially summer time when I sweat, I was yellow. Thank god, you know, people didn't live long. That powder. I guess, eat them up-- sulfur. 

INT: Were they taken? Where were they-- most of them transported to? 

SR: We went to a special place, [? Sulaiv. ?] We went traps, tank traps. You know. We were digging holes for the tanks to-- when they get trapped, and it would-- and camoflage them with trees with different stain. So when they're on, they fall into the trap. 

INT: And where was [? Sulaiv? ?] 

SR: Somewhere in Poland, I don't know. Then, they took us from there to Czestochowa, ammunition factories and working. 

INT: And what you do there? 

SR: I was working on the railroad repairing things. And one day, there was a fellow, a foolish pullman-- foreman he name was Malinowski-- a no good SOB. He was the 6' 4', big old

Polack. He screamed and hollered and beat up people unmerciful. Pick up to the railroad, schnell. When the Germans come here, I'll schnell you and schnell you. That's the only few words of German he could speak. One day, he was using and loading a lot of stone to pack it in the railroad car and the railroad ties on the railroad. He used too much stones, and a bunch of SS came in-- commanders from the railroad-- and told him he used too much stones. He-- he said, ja, ja, ja. And I will standing on the side, Sol Rosenberg, he got to be everywhere. And he hollered, ja, ja, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. Ja, ja, ja. He said, don't have to say everything I say. Ja, ja. [SPEAKING GERMAN]. So I came in, Sol Rosenberg. I said, Herr Obersturmfuhrer, I called him. He was a lieutenant. I called him major, you know, Obersturmfuhrer. [SPEAKING GERMAN] He looked at me there and says, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. I said, ja. I said good. Signs of the dumb Polack he say, plus he [? signed. ?] So I translate from German to Polish to Malinowski. When I was translating, the German just looked at me. The SS, they just went over. And the Polack, Malinowski, he just bewilderness what I'll tell him what to do. And he had a little respect for me. And he beat everybody with a whip. You know, whip. And he never hit me. He'd been hitting everybody. And once a month, I think, the Germans give him a bunch of coals. He had a pickup truck. So he's loading up the pickup truck coal and take it home. Well, we went into the warehouse. He told us to load electric motors and pumps in the hidden apartment under that pickup truck, and put on the top the coals. And I've been thinking about that, Sol Rosenberg. One day, I was laying on the bunk bed, all hang around with me. I had a lot of friends in concentration camp. And I used to tell them not to hang around with me. They would think I'm a leading or something. For some reason, I used to say that. And I see one couple boys had whips all over their face. And I'm laying on the bed, and I'm think about and said, my gosh, I cannot wait till tomorrow morning when I face Malinowski, what I'm going to. It was cold, honey. Some people would stay by the coal oven outside. And then he came in hollering, Juden, Juden, Juden, Juden, [SPEAKING GERMAN], all this screaming. Then, he starts speaking Polish-- [SPEAKING POLISH]. [? Circumcised ?] people, all kind of names-- nasty names, and started talking, holler and screaming. And I still stayed by the oven. I was ready for him. And he picked up that whip, I swear to you, to try and hit me. Well, he tried to hit me. He was 6' 4', a big old Polack. I caught that whip in my hand, and I say to him, you no good son of a bitch. That's what I told him. He bewilderness look at me, what did you call me? I said you're a no good son of a bitch. Do you know what's going to happen to you? You're going to the concentration camp. What are you talking? So [? you're ?] [? moving. ?] I said you've even been stealing electric motors, pumps, for you and you should be nice to us. Instead, you're whipping my people, hitting them. You ought to see the scars what you made on our men. I mentioned the name on some them. You ought to be ashamed, you a dirty no good Polack, I told him. You're going get yours now. Oh Solly, Solly. You know, that's just for the party I'm taking that. The party want to liberate all of the concentration camp. You know, he'd say, you a good Polack. A minute ago, you called me dirty Jew and all kind of names. You called circumcise, you know, no, I'm a good Polack I'm not a Polack. I said you know, I'm doing for the party then. You're not gonna tell the Germans what we were doing. I said, under one condition, you no good SOB. I called him again SOB. Boy, I really was like Samson or like David, talking to Goliath, a big old giant. He a little Jewish boy. And I say to him, you go good son of a bitch, I'll tell you what I'm going to do. If you don't touch one of my people here, I will not tell. You sure you're not going to tell? Look, I got honor. I'm a good Jewish and proud Jewish boy. You damn Polacks been mistreating our people. You are still captive. Your country is-- is occupied by the Germans. You ain't got nothing, you Polish people. You should be helpful to us. Instead, you're collaborators. Oh, I'm a good Polack. I work for the party. And then we try to liberate you, oh [INAUDIBLE] and all that stuff he gave me. I said I'll tell you, I'm not going to tell the German what you was doing. But the one time that I ever see you hit one of my people, be statistic like you've been, you'll be going to concentration camp-- your whole family too. He said, Solly, you're not gonna do it. You're a good Polack. You're still a Polack he said. You're still a Polack. I said, I'm not a Polack. You know. You know I'm doing it for my party. Every day, he was bringing me ham sandwich. [LAUGHS] Cake, he was bringing me. Solly, you know, like this-- put the hand, come in the side. Then the Nazis came in. I said, when the Germans come in, you can-- you know the only few words German you know, schnell [GERMAN] schnell. You can say that. You don't have to hit them with a whip. Just touch the whip like this. You don't have to hit my people [INAUDIBLE] and hurt them, you know, and blooding them like you've been doing. You don't have to do that. Then, that's what I'm going do, Solly. And you're gonna keep your word. I said, I've got pride in me. I would never tell nobody, and I gave you mine. Give me you hand, shake hands like one Polack to another Polack. I said look, cut that out, one Polack to another Polack. I'm a Jew and a proud Jew, even though I'm in a concentration camp now. One day, gonna be our time too. You bunch of Polacks ought to be ashamed of yourself, how you collaborated with the Nazis. I told him that. From A to Z, I unloaded everything on him. And I would never tell. You know, he never, never bothered my people, never hurt anybody, my people. I thought about-- I thought this time, my friends could hear that. I called him SOB. They could hear them they were working on the side. What did you say? I said, he's a difference mensch. He's a difference mensch. I said you're going to be a difference mensch. And now he's going to find out in the concentration camp. I already made a deal for him. And you'd better get away from my bed. You know I don't want to hang around my bed. All of them looked up to me, I don't mind to tell you. In concentration camp, they looked up to me. I always had a lot of friends. And-- 

INT: How long were you at Czestochowa? 

SR: Huh? 

INT: How long were you at Czestochowa? 

SR: Till the Russians started coming in, and they shipped us to Buchenwald. 

INT: And that was? 

SR: They were loading up, that must have been, in January. 

INT: Of which year? 

SR: And December later. Where was, who remembers. I don't know. I can remember the months. 

INT: Was it  of 1944 or 19-- 

SR: Yeah, maybe, late, late, late. 

INT: Maybe December 1944? 

SR: Yeah, yeah absolutely. It was very cold, you know. 

INT: How did you end up leaving Czestochowa? 

SR: Huh? 

INT: How did you end up leaving Czestochowa? 

SR: The railroad cars that took us. 

INT: What events happened though? 

SR: They that took us to Buchenwald. Then, the Nazis were bombed. The English would bomb the rails. And between Dresden and Leipzig, I don't know, somewhere there, the railroads were bombed, and we couldn't go nowhere. We were in the cars, stuffed up, hungry, no water. 

INT: How long were you stuck on the cars trying to get between Czestochowa and Buchenwald? 

SR: For-- for a while, for quite a few days. 

INT: Four or five days? 

SR: Yeah, for quite a few days. And then they told us, we can open the doors. I was hungry, tired, thirsty. I left the car and started jumping in the roofs. I jump. I jumped, Sol Rosenberg, I jumped until I'd seen a red roof, a house. And I jumped in that house. And I opened that door, was a nurse in that house. My [? lieber ?] god, she said. I said, [SPEAKING GERMAN], don't be scared. I will not harm you. [SPEAKING GERMAN]? What do you want? I said I need water. I need to eat. I'm hungry. I just came from the car. And I spoke German not to worry about it. And she got the bewilderness, you know, look at me and started asking me questions and different things. And I told her, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. Why, I'm on the car. You know they took all of the Juden in concentration camps. I'm [INAUDIBLE], just because I'm a Juden. And she started talking to me, talking to me. And then she say she have to make a telephone call. I said oh my me, you know, she's gonna make a telephone call and call somebody or something. And she called the hospital. I understood German. And she said she feel a little bit bad, but she's coming. She gonna be little late. And believe it or not, she fed me, give me to eat. And we sit down and talk, tell me all her story. She'd never met a Jewish fella. I'm the first Jew she ever met. She read about poetry or heard about Jewish different thing-- writers and painters, intellectuals. How a person should never met any Jews. And I told her about my family, myself. And she asked me if I want to wash myself. I washed myself. She game me a clean shoes from her brother. One of her brothers is on the front line. Her father and mother died. Her mother died. She lived by herself in that house. She worked in the hospital. 

INT: which city were you in? Were you in Germany? 

SR: Dresden. I don't know. Before you get to a city, you know, it's like a little country. I don't know. 

INT: And the railroad cars weren't locked? 

SR: Well, no they opened the doors to-- to go out. 

INT: Did a lot of people leave? 

SR: No, I don't know nobody left except Sol Rosenberg. And they're all sitting by the cars. You know. And the SS men have been going back and forth. You know. And I sneaked out and keep running, running, running, running, running without a stop till I saw a red roof. That's where I went into the first house. And from that house, maybe 500, 600, 1,000 yard was another house, another house. You know. And she and I became really talking. And-- and believe it or not, I didn't have much hair on me. I was just a young boy. She say she want to shave me. I said oh my god, shave me. She'll try to cut me, and kill me, you know, I thought. She threw it on, she used to shave her daddy, you know, shave him clean and told me to comb my hair and clean shoes, boots. We really start talking. And she say she would like me to stay here. She showed me a cellar. When they bomb, I can go on the [? roof, ?] you know, in the cellar. And she say-- I say, how about people? She said nobody ever come here. It's just a postman coming with a bicycle, up the main and keep going. And I go up to the town, the guest house, I don't know, restaurant. From time to time, she's going dancing. Right now, the time is so bad, the morale is bad from the German people who were doing no good. She hear about Buchenwald. She knew about it. She told me it's all a politic. I told, you know, it's a prison just for political people. And-- and we start talking, she wanted me to stay there. She-- she gonna watch over me. She wanted to take care of me to survive that war. And she left. She held me matter of fact. And she left, went to work. And here's Sol sitting there, and thinking, well, what should I do. And I'm thinking, honest to truth, that's what I did like this. Shall I stay? Shall I not stay? Shall I stay? Shall I not stay? And I decided-- I decided to leave and I took some bread with me. And I run back, and I was praying, I hope the train is still there. And I was worried about maybe the train already left. And [? slap ?] me, what a schmuck I was, I came away and went back to train. I brought bread for my friends, cigarettes. You know. I had different boots and I came back to the train. 

INT: Do you remember the nurse's name? 

SR: Martha. Martha her name. Yeah. She was a nice person. 

INT: So you got back to the train, and how long was it until it moved? 

SR: For a couple days I think, we went Buchenwald. You know. 

INT: And what you see when the doors opened on the train and you were at Buchenwald? What-- what did you see when you first got  there? 

SR: I think I saw Buchenwald written, but-- no, I don't know. I don't remember. I don't remember. I think I did see Buchenwald. I don't know [INAUDIBLE]. I think-- I don't remember what I'd seen. I know I was in Buchenwald. And they sent us in different barracks. Then was a Jewish fellow. His name was Gustav. He's supposed to be in charge of the Jewish people. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Buchenwald was amazing. It was-- each nationality had some kind of leader to look up to them. You know, Elie Wiesel was Buchenwald. I think he was in the block. I never knew him. I think he was in the-- he was a couple years younger than I am. He was in the children block with Gustav. He was a redhead. 

INT: Did you ever see him there? 

SR: Oh yeah, plenty of times I saw him. He used to drink a lot of vodka too. His cheeks were red, you know, is reddish. 

INT: Did you ever meet him? 

SR: Yeah, not after the war. 

INT: But during, at Buchenwald, did you meet Elie Wiesel? 

SR: I seen him. He-- he had all the children in his barrack. And when the SS come in, he was buddy-buddy with them. And he used to tell the little children to salute to the SS. 

INT: Are you talking about Gustav or Elie? 

SR: Gustav. 

INT: OK. 

SR: I think he was a no good son of a bitch. I think he murdered a lot of people. You see, a lot of people don't want to tell the truth what was going on. I'm telling you what was going. A lot of people don't even want to write about that because they don't want to talk about what some people did. You see, I don't care. I'm telling you the truth. You want to know, I'm telling you. I've been there. I've seen that. They arrived a lot of kapos and policemen, Jewish policemen, from different jobs, whatever, different cities. There were different camps, there were. And some, the people who came with them complained about them they were no good, they were mean, they were-- didn't behave themselves. And they'd tell that to Gustav. Gustav was god. Gustav came in and took them up. You've never seen them back again. He'd kill them. There was two brothers whose name was Katz. One of them was a good looking boy. He-- he-- he hollered, scream. And he was not that mean, that bad. He didn't deserve to be killed. His name was Pontel. Gustav got his henchmen. At night, they beat the crap out of him. In the morning, they put a blanket over them and report to the SS how many died. He was ruling who should live, who should not live. You know. Then-- 

INT: Which barracks were you in at Buchenwald? 

SR: I don't remember. 68 I think it was or 66. I think 65 was the children barrack, I think. 

INT: Do you remember what month and year you got to Buchenwald? 

SR: When I got to Buchenwald? 

INT: Mm-hm. 

SR: I don't know, January or December. I don't know. 

INT: In 1944, is that it? 

SR: No, '45-- '44 December. 

INT: '44, OK. 

SR: '44 December. I don't remember. We were not too long, a few months there. And Buchenwald really going to work. I didn't want to stay in the barracks. 

INT: What kind of work did you do? 

SR: That's what I want to tell you. I-- I always volunteered to go out and work. We used to go into Weimar-- W-E-I-M-A-R-- Weimar. They used to be the Republic, you know. Weimar, not to far from Buchenwald. And they were needing engineers. They were needing people just to clean up the streets look fair, helping out the German population after the bomb what was going on. You know. And-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then, they'd been needing and I told one of them I was working ammunition and I know a little bit about bombs. So they assigned me to picking up bombs, unexploded bombs. I was supposed to know if they exploded or not. They give me ear plug like he got to hear. I can hear no device, nothing. I just wouldn't tell them. 

INT: And this was around Weimar? That's where you were. 

SR: And I'd been going to run up there. By Weimar was the airfield, and we used to pick it up. And I think I had some kind of sickness. I couldn't eat. They fed us pretty good this time. Then I always wanted to go out and work. When I worked, I was organized something to eat. And one day, we were cleaning up buildings. They had people look for Germans, what been bombed. And the English started and getting bombed again. And we run. There was a couple Belgian boys and myself. And they caught us and they put needles in my hands. I was wondering what's going on here. And they tested my blood. Before you knew it, I wound up in a-- in a cellar with a German laying, a high-ranking officer, and they use my blood to put blood in him in-- in Weimar. 

INT: He was sick and he needed blood? 

SR: He was not to sick. He was wounded. 

INT: He was wounded. 

SR: He lost blood. And I must have the right blood I guess. 

INT: Do you know who that officer was? 

SR: No, but listen what happened. So one was a doctor and a young doctor assistant. And a young doctor told him he's a Juden. It's Juden blood. To him he said, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. It don't matter. He got the right blood for that man. He mentioned something officer, high-ranking officer he mentioned. So he-- then he started. The young German officer, he started to complain when he's going to find out he'd  been given Jewish blood, he really gonna be not appreciable. He's-- the older doctors say he gonna appreciate the young boy for giving him to keep him alive with the young blood. And before you know, he started asking me, have I been sick. I ever had mentals in my family, the older doctor. I think his name was [? Horace ?] or something like that. I can't remember his name. And he said has anybody been sick in my family, mental sick of something. I said no. Then, the younger doctor, he said his blood is pretty good blood. You just-- you keep your mouth shut, the old doctor told the young officer. And then the older-- older doctor asked me did you ever have sex. I said, yeah. So the young doctor said I bet you he had sex with a German girl. I said, yeah. And then all the doctors said to the young one-- 

INT: How did they transfuse your blood? Did they stick a needle in your arm, or how did they get the blood? 

SR: Out of my arm they got my blood, right out of my arm. And he was abed. 

INT: How did it feel to think that you might be saving the life if an SS? 

SR: I was mad. I figured, you son of a gun, taking away my blood. You know. And-- and the German, the younger officer, he-- he was not happy taking Jewish blood. And the doctor said he got good blood. I think he told him one time he got as good blood as you or better, real good blood. And they started to question me, and-- like asking me questions if anybody in my family had been sick, or mentally retarded, or any disease. I told him no, nobody in my family. Then I went back, he give me that candy and that sandwich. And the trucks were waiting, and they took us back to Buchenwald. And I start-- I told my friends what happened. They told me, you better stay away from there. Don't go over there, because they gonna suck you dry. I was a little weak when I can recall, I was so scared in-- in the wilderness-- I don't know what kind of [? words. ?] I see something different happen, which I thought-- when I got back he really scared me, one of the fellas. He said, you could fill out, you know, when too much blood you give. And then again, I went working in-- to Buchenwald, to Weimar. 

INT: You were still-- you were still clearing the bombs and mines? 

SR: The bombs. Even I went into the kitchen and found a lot of onions, and I put it in my pants, the onions. And when we came in to Buchenwald, in the prison, we have to jump. You know. About four or five people hold hands. While I was jumping all the onions fell out, and the SS took me out and beat the crap out of me. They beat me up bad. And was waiting-- for the night shift was waiting another group, PWs-- POWs, Russians, to go in to work. And the Nazi SS told the Russian to get the onions. So when I left, after he beat me up, the Russians call me back-- [SPEAKING RUSSIAN] in Russian-- and they give me all the onions back, the Russians. 

INT: Now, why would they do that? 

SR: They were prisoners, too, you know. They were going to work, too. 

INT: They were probably as hungry as you were at that point. 

SR: They were waiting to be cornered to get out to go on to work. They still were wearing Russian uniforms because they were war prisoners, I guess. I mean, military, you know, prisoners. So I got back and worked different places in Buchenwald till we were assigned-- they're gonna-- starting evacuating all the Jews. 

INT: And approximately when was that, time wise? 

SR: End of March, April. 

INT: 19-- 

SR: 1945. And I didn't-- I did not report. I was hiding. 

INT: Where were you hiding? 

SR: Under the barracks, different places. And then when they evacuate all the Jews I got in the one block was a gypsy. He gave me a jacket with a Polish-- political colors, red with a P. And that's when I put it on, and a few days later, they evacuate the entire concentration camp. The Russians were knocking on the door, so we were marching to-- to Dachau. I was in that march from Buchenwald to Dachau. 

INT: How long did that take? 

SR: Took a whole month, almost. My gosh, people were freezing, dying, every day people die. People were making prayers over the cross, and SS been shooting them. Boy, terrible thing was going on. They were not Jews, just hidden Jews like myself. You know. That's time when I named myself and my friends, our name [? Starkashinsky. ?] That's where I got the name [? Starkashinsky. ?] Till we got in to Dachau. Till we got into Dachau, what can I tell you? People die like flies. 

INT: What were they dying of? 

SR: Freezing to death. It was so cold. And some of them had blankets, some of them didn't have blankets. And-- and I was really lucky. Some soldiers, we carried sacks on the back, they were tired. I'll talked in some of them for me to carry the sack. Then came [NON-ENGLISH], came airplanes, came bomb. Everybody run in the woods. We run in the woods, Sol got into that sack. He ate all the candies he could, a little meat polish. Only thing I didn't eat was razor blades and soup, and throw everything away. Then when we were ready to go out, he was looking for the Klein and me. There were a lot of Klein-- you know, short fellows like me. Everybody looked the same way I looked. He passed me looking for me. He couldn't recognize me. In the meantime, I had a little bit to eat. Constantly reorganizing to stay alive. That's the only way to stay alive, and that's what my name was. Meantime, my friend called, Stark, Stark! You know, I forgot myself, who I am. My name was [? Starkashinsky. ?] You know. 

INT: And as well as your name change, did your birthday change? 

SR: I didn't change my birthday. So stupid that was, so stupid. When I got in, a couple days before we got liberated, some kind of Polish organization came to the barracks looking for Polacks. They got packages, and they asked, me what's your name? I told them, [? Starkashinsky ?] from [INAUDIBLE]. When I was born? And I gave them-- to-- to remember that I still was in concentration camp, I said 2/2/1920. Easy to remember, [? Starkashinsky. ?] So stupid I never changed that, I don't know why. Then when the Army came in the Jewish boys start looking for Jews. And I came in to the barracks with packages. And they asked me, where you get that? I said, from my people, from my brothers. He said, what brother? I said, American Jewish people. Why, I thought you a Polack. I said, I'm a Jew. What you talk-- Well, yesterday you was-- I said, well, so what? Big deal. Get job with the leg. You know. I'm Jewish and proud of who I am, you know. And-- and then we went for the papers. And so stupid for me I never changed my-- then, when I register to go to America, work with the intelligence, and I never changed it. 2/2/1920, just-- I don't know. I don't know, I just don't know. Just don't know. I start getting-- getting a little realized about my age when I was in America. Would you believe that? I never thought about-- big deal. You know. 

INT: Going back to the march from Buchenwald to Dachau, you said when you got to Dachau that people were freezing. Some had blankets, some didn't. 

SR: Oh, yeah. 

INT: Where were you housed? 

SR: In the barracks, almost by the fences. We could see the Army coming in. You know, fighting. We even could see-- some-- some the inmates were where they jumped to the fence and they got electrocuted, some of them. The last second, they got electrocuted. One of them say-- one of them hollered, the French soldiers. One of them say, English soldiers. Then some of them from a-- I don't know, different nationalities. One of them I remember who was a Hungarian or something like that screaming, that's Americans. How you know American? You see everyone chewing gum. Americans chewing gum. I didn't even know who they were, and it was almost like a revolution in the concentration camp. They were SS, they were going around killing unbelievable. Believe it or not, the first flag I could see, a Jewish flag with a David star. And chaplains, they're looking for Jewish boys. Boy, you never see such a thing in your life what was going on. They were looking, everyone, for Jewish boys. You know. They were something. I'll never forget it. And I've seen generals, Patton, all kind of generals I see coming into the concentration camp. I must have been in a thousand pictures. Every minute have like this, camera, camera, camera. Never forget that the first cigarette that I smoked, a Camel, I faded. I fell out. I couldn't take that nicotine, and I want it bad. You know. 

INT: What was the date that you were liberated? 

SR: April 29th. 

INT: And that was by the Americans? 

SR: The Americans, yeah. 

INT: After you were liberated, what did you do? 

SR: I hang around in the camp. Not in-- not in Dachau, I got out and looking for clothes, you know, another clothes. And I was-- the Army came in and give us baths. Give me a bath and give me some clothes, some old Nazi clothes. I didn't like the clothes, the soldier. I got some other clothes. And they gave us powder and water. 

INT: What about food? 

SR: Well, my English was not so good. There was a Jewish doctor, he spoke to me in Yiddish. 

INT: Do you remember his name? 

SR: No. 

INT: What about food? 

SR: Food? They give us food, told us not to eat that much, to slow down eating. Then I start to follow the Army, working with the Army, clean the kitchens. You know. And I got involved in-- with the Army, and then they were looking-- they wouldn't hire Germans to work, and I was working and playing. I was boxing with them. You know. Throw me an American football. I never knew-- never seen that football-- egg-shaped, it was really funny. I kicked it a little bit, that football, and I got involved with the Army then. Then we was just loafing around, looking for family, going from one place to another. And my friend who was with me, Herman, somebody told him out of Munich-- out of Landsberg, about 15 kilometer-- a few Jewish girls were liberated, and one of them is his girlfriend, Herman's. So he was really excited. And they told one of them-- and one of them is a blonde girl, a beautiful girl. And he told me, Herman. I was involved with the Army, and carrying a gun. [NON-ENGLISH]. You know. And he said to me, Sol, you come with me. I said no, you go see your girlfriend. He said Sol, you're going with me. She's up there, a beautiful blonde girl. You're gonna love that girl. You always talk about blonde girls. No, that's stop. He talked me. He-- and we hitchhiked one place to another place, and got to that city, Buchloe. That's where he met his girlfriend, Herman, and they got married. 

INT: And Herman's last name? 

SR: Kornhauser. He got married, and then I met my wife, Tola, and I volunteered to the Army. I was with working with the intelligence. 

INT: When you volunteered to the Army you mean the American-- you mean the American-- 

SR: I didn't-- I worked for them, let's put it that way. 

INT: The American Army. 

SR: American Army, tank battalion. And they got me to hunt Nazis, SS, and told me I'm not employed by them. They don't know about me, a whole story. They don't know anybody, no names, nothing. I got something to report, so they give me cigarettes and different nothing and nothing. I was happy what the give me to do something. And then I was supposed to go into Japan. That outfit left for Japan, and everybody encouraged me to go into Japan. In the mean time, I fell in love with Tola. I couldn't leave her. And I decided not to go with the Army, to that-- to Japan. I fell in love with Tola, and courting her, and then they transfer me to the constabulary infantry, something. And I still was working. I was going once a week, once every other week, to Munich and seeing somebody. I don't even remember that Captain's name-- [? Latrell ?] or [? Spatrell, ?] I don't know, some kind of Italian name. Which, I'm not supposed to mention nothing, don't know nothing what's going on, not to tell my friends nothing. Just report. 

INT: Did you-- 

SR: Then they want me to teach me more-- I spoke Russian. They wanted to teach me a little more Russian to send me to Czechoslovakia. 

INT: Do-- what were you going to do in Czechoslovakia? 

SR: Spy for the Army. I don't know, they want to-- they want to-- I'm not supposed to tell nobody for the next 20 years, all that cockeyed thing. I was so young, I didn't know what they were telling me, to tell you the truth. I say, yes, I guess. You know. And then I met a couple Jewish boys, a Sergeant [? Schneider. ?] He told how [NON-ENGLISH] I am. What do you want to get involved in those-- [INAUDIBLE] stupid things? What are you looking for? You just got out of frying pan. Where are you going? What do you want? Just stay where you are, be happy, play soccer, enjoy life. You know. Go to America, go to school, find a job. You don't want all that crap being a spy. And I guess he was right. And then, before you know it, we were talking about-- and then couldn't leave Tola. You know, I was in love, and-- and I was a young boy, and she was young, and it was the style in Germany. Everybody got married after the war. Every day was a wedding, you know, in the D-- displaced camps. You know, every day were weddings. And so we decided-- I was just a young boy. And I'm kidding, Tola, I say she talked me into getting married. I tell-- when we had a 20-- 50 anniversary, you know, I told my children, your mama talked me-- oh, she said, he lied. Talked me to getting married. I didn't want to get-- I was so young, just out living. But I realize life was bad to be by yourself. She didn't have  nobody. I didn't have nobody. We need each other, and the best thing I ever did, got married. You know, two young people starting all over again. It just can go on. 

INT: Did you ever go through Landsberg-- 

SR: To Lansberg? 

INT: Where-- and stay at the displaced persons' camp? Or-- 

SR: Yeah, every day almost. I used to drive my bicycle or car. 

INT: But you didn't-- you didn't live there. 

SR: No, I lived better than the people in Landsberg. I live in a palace in Germany. I got a big old home, and my son later was born, my baby. I had a maid for my baby. I had a maid to wash clothes, a maid to clean the house. 

INT: And what were you-- what work were you doing at that point, when-- when Joe was born? 

SR: What I was doing, I was still with the intelligence. And then we had a little store up there in Germany-- partnership-- a fruit store. And I was getting a little money out of that-- 

INT: When you were working-- 

SR: And I was getting a little money from the German government, you know. 

INT: When you were working for the US Army and you were hunting Nazis, were you successful? Did you find any SS? 

SR: I find a lot of SS. They never did nothing to them. Not Nazis, I was hunting-- I was hunting SS. 

INT: Do you remember the names of any of the people that you located? 

SR: I used to find them-- can't remember-- Heinz, Schmeinz, you know, all kind of stuff. Baker, one of them, [? Labeler, ?] Funchs. I reported, record them. I was told who they are, everything-- reported to them. They never did nothing to them. 

INT: They weren't arrested? Or they weren't-- 

SR: They picked them up, investigate them, then I'd see them back on the streets. They ain't did nothing. I don't know why they made me do that. I-- maybe I was not aware too much, not educated in the intelligence. I was not, to tell you the truth. They just liked me, give me the job because I spoke German or something, I don't know. I was not, you know, qualified, I guess, for the job. I guess I was smart enough to realize and talk. They did coach me a little bit to find out-- go into the guest houses, talking. You know, a lot of them didn't know who I was. I told them I was a German. Which, I was, you know, camouflaged, you know, as a German, and talking to one of them, another one, you know. And they told me how to talk. They coached me a little bit. You know. To be truthfully, I was not a qualified person. I was too young, you know. And I hadn't had that schooling here to be in the intelligence-- just some luck I got in, and they thought I could help them some way. Maybe some that wanted to do something, that was looking like people like me to report to him, so I kept them occupied with their job. I reported a bunch of them. Some of them I never knew what happened, and some of them I've seen them-- I report them, I see them all the time. 

INT: What was the date of your marriage? 

SR: November the 11th, 1945. 

INT: And how old were you at that time? 

SR: 19 years old. I was a young boy. 

INT: And Mrs. Rosenberg was? 

SR: Mrs. Rosenberg was 20. She's older than I am a little bit. I told her-- she told me I have to respect her, she's an older woman. I guess I do. 

INT: And your first child born in Buchloe was-- 

SR: In Buchloe. 

INT: His name? 

SR: Joseph and came to America his name is Joe. 

INT: How long after Joe was born did you decide to come to America? 

SR: Well, I-- I registered before to go into America. I-- I could went-- before I got married, I could went to Japan with the Army, and then when the war was over, I would go to America. Then they told me to register going to America. They had places where people could register, people who were in concentration camps, and most of my friends-- a lot of friends-- went to Israel. 

INT: You said earlier that you thought about Israel. 

SR: They'd been-- I'd been thinking about going to Israel, honestly. And for some reason, the Betar, Menachem Begin, the people involved in-- in-- in Warsaw knew me more than I knew them, you know. Knew my story, and they told me about maybe they would look in the Irgun. It was looking for young boys like me, dumb boys that don't know nothing, with guts in them to do something, you know, exciting things. And I used to look for exciting things to do, you know, and I was wearing the American uniform, wearing that .45. Oh, I was really-- I thought I'm something. You know. And I almost fell in that. You know. And just when I got married and my wife was pregnant, that's when everything was going on. And they told me they want to take me to Marseille or somewhere. Where is Marseille, Belgium? Somewhere-- is Marseille in Belgium? 

INT: Marseille, maybe in France? 

SR: France, Belgium-- I think Belgium. I don't know, Antwerp, I don't know, somewhere. They want to take me and smuggle me to Haifa and join the Irgun. And I told them I cannot leave. My-- my wife is pregnant, she's soon How-- how can my wife go with us? No, they can not. After, they are going to send her. They're gonna send after her. And then I had a baby already. Still Israel was not independent. They want me. You see, your wife got the baby, she's safe here. We're going to bring her later. I said no, we're gonna travel all, the whole family. And before two, three, four, five times, and they forgot about me and I registered to America. My papers came. 

INT: When did your papers come, do you remember? 

SR: My papers came, I think, like September. 

INT: Of 1945? 

SR: 1949. And they told me to report. And I report to a doctor. You know, I have to be inspected, and obtain FBI-- I don't know, a whole big story. And then I went to-- to Bremen, you know, and been there for maybe two months after waiting for a ship. You know, to the south. I came to New Orleans. Most those ships were going to New York. 

INT: Did Mrs. Rosenberg and Joe come with you to Bremen? 

SR: Yeah, and she was pregnant, Tola. She had a rough time. 

INT: And so you took a ship from Bremen to-- 

SR: To New Orleans. 

INT: To New Orleans. 

SR: Yeah, I landed in New Orleans. 

INT: What was your first impression of the United States in New Orleans? 

SR: The first impression there, when I approached the Gulf-- they told me I'm Gulf-- my wife and I started kissing each other. Left stinking Europe, you know, and we're in America. And then when we came to New Orleans, everybody-- somebody came and picked everybody up. I said, by, it looked like everybody got a family except me. We're lost. And before you know it, somebody called Sol Rosenberg and Tola Rosenberg. I was excited. Some Jewish people, you know, from New Orleans. 

INT: Were they from the Joint Distribution Center? 

SR: Joint Distribution. And they picked us up, and put us in a car, and took us on Canal Street. Boy, before Christmas everything was lighted. It was unbelievable. I was really amazed. And Joe spoke a little bit German. You know, he hollered, Nikolaos, Nikolaos, Nikolaos. Boy, he'd scream it. He was really excited about Nikolaus. You know, Santa Claus in German was Nikolaus. He really was excited. And then we stayed there. They took us to the Jewish foster home on St. Charles Avenue. Have you ever been there? 

INT: Yes. 

SR: They gave us a party, a big supper. They really took us in nice. And I was assigned to come to Monroe. 

INT: Now, how were you assigned to come to Monroe? 

SR: I don't know. I was supposed to work in a drug store, a druggist. Just to [INAUDIBLE], you know, sponsor some like this, you know, when I assigned. Then when I-- then I came to Monroe. We traveled with the train all night. 

INT: From New Orleans to Monroe? 

SR: From New Orleans to Monroe. And we were sitting-- we got up, got off, and I said to my wife, gosh honey, look at the three of us here, the baby, lost. Where we going? Where we going? Who we are? And a little bit broken English I could explain myself. There was a fellow named Frenchie, I knew him very well later years. He offered me-- took me, buy me donuts. And I was waiting. I said, gosh, what are we gonna do here? Don't know the language. A little bit, don't know anybody. It's really-- it was really strange. You know. Really strange. 

INT: How did you end up in a ship headed for New Orleans? Did you choose to come to New Orleans? 

SR: No, because I was going assigned to Monroe, Louisiana. So they wouldn't put me on a ship to New York, they put me on a ship to the south. 

INT: So you knew leaving Breman that you were going to end up in Monroe? 

SR: Yeah. 

INT: Because you went through the Joint Distribution Center. 

SR: Yeah. 

INT: OK, and when you came to Monroe there was no one here to receive you? 

SR: Yeah, then in the morning somebody show up, picked us up, and took us-- and took us to-- to our hotel. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was really strange. And broke-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] broke or [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] happy, you know, and dreams. Like every immigrant came to this country had a dream, I had a dream, too. Being in a free country, and I knew I would be able to take care of myself. I have always not just dreams, I have hopes for the better. I was young, 23 years old, full of pep, strength, I knew I have to do something. So I had a teacher to teach me English. That was my first-- you know, first thing. I knew that's what I have to do, learn English. That was a priority of mine. I told me wife, I said, honey, we had a job working for furniture. That's why I start working for furniture, just a short time. 

INT: You said when you came to Monroe, you worked in a furniture store. 

SR: Yeah, I was a shipping clerk. 

INT: And how long were you a shipping clerk? 

SR: Maybe two years. 

INT: And you came to Monroe when? 

SR: In December-- 

INT: Of 19-- 

SR: --1949. 

INT: OK. After you were a shipping clerk, what did you do? 

SR: First, I was just a worker. Then, I was assistant. Then, I became manager. 

INT: Of the furniture store? 

SR: Of the furniture store. And I was going to school. My boss thought I spend too much in school. So he told me I speak better English and read better than he can. And he really, I wish he wouldn't give it to me, because anything you learn a plus. And he made me quit, you know, which I didn't like it. Because he was needing me different times of day to be with him. And I wish he wouldn't do that to me. 

INT: Where did you-- 

SR: Because I really enjoyed it. 

INT: Where did you take the English class? 

SR: It's a-- it's a-- I had a private teacher. Her name was Mrs. Hester. She taught me English. She used to teach in Columbia University. And-- and she thought I did good-- been doing good, she thought. I used to do lots better than I'm doing today. I used to write good and everything, you know. I got involved in business. I had so many secretaries. I had sometime I used to complain to my teacher such a difficulties, and watch your tongue, don't be [INAUDIBLE]. I had problems. She say, get a dictionary. And I thought it's really something which is not proper way to do it. Almost everybody carry a dictionary. And I used to carry a little dictionary in my book. When I wouldn't pronounce it right or spell wrong, I look in the dictionary. I don't want to look like a schlemiel spelling something, and maybe not proper or right way about it. It's-- it's proper. Everybody do that. It's proper way. If you don't know something, you answer, how you spell it? How you spell it? I used [INAUDIBLE] conscious to say that. You know, I thought it's not common. But it's very common to say how you spell something. It's-- it's something. 

INT: When you left the furniture store, where did you to work? 

SR: I had a friend of mine. He was in scrap, buying scrap iron, running around. And he was telling me, he was a nice fellow. He use to come to the house taking me a ride. I didn't have no car. And he really did a mitzvah-- took me out on a little boy. And then I had another little boy. And he'd been telling me he ran around buying scrap and making a living. And he got a fellow-- a black fellow with him. And he help in driving the truck, and he'd making a nice living. He really liked it. And he told me he makes some day $30, $35, $40. Hey, I worked a whole week for that money. And something in my kopf, in the head been laying about him, what he was telling me. And soon enough, the poor fellow was sick and died. They didn't have no children. And I knew that lady, very-- Kaplan was her name-- very well. And Leon-- the truck went back to the, [? you know, ?] national people. And-- and I was working with that fellow in the furniture store. He always threatened me, and was not appreciable of what I was doing. I was working for two, three people. One day, I just quit. And most people say what are you going to do? You've got a family. I said, I'll take care of them. I'm in a free country. Nobody going to have to feed me. I know how to take care of my family. Then, I started running around, burying scrap iron. I could hardly drive a truck. Barely drove a car. Before you know it, I find out where is that black fellow who used to work for him, Leon. And I had somebody else running around all over the road. And people liked me. And I started doing real good. And I liked that work what I was doing. People thought I'm Leon's son, you know, because he never talked about children. He was an older fellow. And I went places where he was going, and I start making a living. And people liked me. And before you know it, I got into the oil fields, and buying pipe. I had a friend of mine that never met Jewish people even in-- in the country. And all of them, they like me. I told him who I am. And they start selling me pipe, and told me to start selling more pipe-- better than scrap iron, you know. And I started selling pipe and more and more. And then I got into business with a-- a lot older man here. He was born here in Monroe. Mr. Marx-- David Marx. And we decided I always have, you know, aspiration, and then the dream to have my own business. I was always active, and to give constructive myself, to be independent-- not to depend on nobody. And I thought about how I was a mistreated in the scrap yard. So I open up my own scrap yard. And I had the courage, you know, and the ability to have that kind of, you know, undertaking. I took to David Marx. He was born here. He was the bookkeeper. And we opened up a scrap yard. We were doing good, you know. It called Twin City Scrap. And then time got bad, and I had more dreams, and I want to advance more. And he was an older fellow. How much money he was making. He was happy. I had a young family. My wife was pregnant again. I was dreaming all morning. I want to have a better life and get more things. And I was young and full of strength. And-- and I decided, I said David, you buy me out, or I'll buy you out. He said, I'm an old man. Where I be going? How about I buy you out? I said, good. So I took the trucks, a little money, and started buying more scrap iron, buying a lot, and buying more pipe and more pipe. And before you know it, I learned how to deal with pipe, and how to straighten pipe, make a different [? strength. ?] Given customer got me another piece of property. And slowly, I got in the pipe business, and I had good relation. 

INT: You've owned your own business since what date? Since what year? 

SR: I believe I think 1957. 

INT: And the name of your business currently? 

SR: It used to be Twin City Scrap. Then I left mine-- left mine partner, and let him have the business. And I went on my own. I-- I had ability, and courage, young, initiative. I always felt, you know, positively. I can achieve things what I wanted. The opportunity was here. I could see it, could feel it. And-- and I enjoyed what I was doing. I established my name. And I was trust from the people on the road. And-- and I start doing more and more pipe business, before you know it. And really started doing pretty good, in the pipe business. Opened up a pipe yard under the name in 19-- I think I opened up the pipe in 1958, which I started naming Sol's Pipe-- Pipe Yard. 

INT: And that's the name of your company currently? 

SR: Then I changed it to Sol's Pipe and Steel. The kids starting come out of the college. And I didn't thought about they're going to get into business. They didn't thought maybe I'd be that big. I don't know. And I starting prospering. Businesses advanced, got very big. 

INT: And the names of the sons who work with you? 

SR: I got two sons work for me. And one of them was a pharmacist. And he wants to come home seeing the boys together with the family, close family. So I opened up another business. Somebody told me open up a nonferrous metals. That pharmacist, from pills he went to metals. And so I-- 

INT: And his name? 

SR: I build him a building. I gave him different things. And I gave it to the three boys. 

INT: So all three boys were in business with you? 

SR: Well, the two boys is with me. But Joe run that metal business. And I told him the profit, you should share. Well, the business was not-- it was young, and he didn't made that much, and they were making a good salary being with me, so Joe, anything he made, he took care of himself. 

INT: And the two boys who currently work with you are? 

SR: Yeah, they graduated from universities. 

INT: Their names are? 

SR: Yeah, Jackie, Jackie and Herman and David. [? I mean, ?] Jackie is next to me, he's the boss. And we've got a good business. We've got 50-some people working. We've probably got the biggest pipe yard. 

INT: And your daughter's names are? 

SR: Jeannie and Terry. They're in Houston. They're registered nurses. 

INT: When you first moved to Monroe, what was the Jewish community like here? 

SR: Pardon me? 

INT: What was the Jewish community like in Monroe when you first moved here? 

SR: They were bewilderness. They've seen a young fella. I had a lot of ambition, aspirations and dreams, you know? They were nice, you know, coming in and see us, you know. They told me this is an old Jewish community-- very old, and from the Civil War. They thought I probably got horns or something, came from Europe, you know, from Germany, and being in a concentration camp. I established quite a few friends you know. And they were established friends. And-- and I was, I guess, accepted. I don't know what you would call it, you know. I'm as good as anybody else. I always felt that way. I had pride and honor in myself. Somebody didn't converse with me, it's all right. I'm as big as you-- maybe bigger. And-- I taught that my children the same way. And we had a quite a family, you know, and thank God for them. 

INT: Based on your experiences, when you hear that David Duke is running for-- 

SR: It really hurt me. 

INT: --senator-- 

SR: It really hurt me. I went to Ruston, and the universities I was involved. I give speeches against Duke. And how can we support and against racism, you know, bigotry, and religious, you know, and Nazi, Hitler, Ku Klux Klan, to be selected-- elected as a governor of our state? It's embarrassing. It's something to the entire state. And I was politicking and going, and talk against. [INAUDIBLE] hurt me. I couldn't understand. And then he run for senator, and almost beat Johnson. It's an embarrassing, a person like this. As a matter of fact, he knew I was against him. And one day, he-- I had a telephone call to my office. One of his-- Marcus's people worked with him, told him Mr. Rosenberg, you've got-- they could hear my speeches and talk-- you got it wrong. Mr. Duke-- Mr. Duke would like to talk to you on. And I don't know happened. I never called back. And I never talked to him. I told him what I think about. And he said they can understand my feeling, about Nazis. Mr. Duke is not a Nazi, and all that stuff, you know. I didn't hear anything more, nothing. 

INT: Well my final questions for you are these. Based on your experience throughout your lifetime, what would you like the world to know, or the world to learn from what you've lived through? 

SR: The world got to learn how cruelty, what can occur in a civilization, in a modern civilization-- Germany-- they called themselves the superior race-- what can happen to human beings, how people can turn to barbarism, to something which it's not heard in this 20th century civilization, people can do one human to another on. And we, especially Jews, we got to remind people what could happen, what can happen. And we need to be on the top, and remind people, and teach the children about the cruelty for one person, what he did to the world, what he did especially to the Jewish people. And building the [? all ?] Holocaust museums and the whole thing, I think that's a wonderful thing. You cannot just sweep that under the rug. You've got to remember. And especially our people, we have to remember what happened to our people, how the people shouldn't be buried somewhere in vain. We should remember that. And we do remember-- myself, as long as I'm alive, the good Lord keep me alive. And we have memorial services. And we always remember the people who perish, people who never did nobody anything, people who were innocent people-- children, women, all the people who got murdered by the Nazi. And we've got to see something like this should never happen again. And it's up to us. And we got to teach the people, and talk about it. And people got to be informed. And I think Mr.-- all the movies, what's going on, that Schindler's List, Mr. Spielberg doing a wonderful thing. They're doing something. Let the people-- a lot of people say, I don't know what happened. I didn't realize what happened to people and the whole thing. People have got to know. The same people. When I meet people and talk to people what happened, how during the bitter years, and the Nazi-- under the Nazis' rule in Germany, people don't really realize. They thought only Jews were murdered. They were other kinds of nationalities were murdered. People got to know it. I was a concentration camp with Catholic, Protestants. They were murdered, too, by Hitler. And-- and any dictatorship, you know, have to be checked. And see, something like this should never happen. And it's up to the people, and to the world, to the free people to teach each other nations what cruelty and what racism, bigotry can happen. So thank God, we live in America, the greatest country in the world. We can express ourself, and say what we think is the right way to do it, to humanity. 

INT: Mr. Rosenberg, can you tell us who is in this picture? 

SR: This is my wife Tola and myself, our wedding picture. In Germany we took that picture-- November 11, 1945. 

INT: OK. 

SR: And who's in this picture? 

SR: This is Tola and myself, presently pictured. 

INT: And when was it taken? 

SR: This, we'd been celebrating after our anniversary. 

INT: And the year? 

SR: 1945-- 1995. 

INT: And where was the picture taken? 

SR: Taken in a restaurant. 

INT: In what city? 

SR: In Monroe, Louisiana. 

INT: Mr. Rosenberg, would you introduce your wife? 

SR: This is my wife, Tola, in the back. That's my girlfriend-- 
TOLA ROSENBERG (WIFE): [CHUCKLING] 

SR: --for many, many years. We hope to live to celebrate our next diamond anniversary. We just present-- recently, we celebrated our 50, our golden anniversary. This is my long-life girlfriend, Tola-- the blondie. [CHUCKLES] That's who I was introduced first time. My friend told me, I want you to meet one of the best-looking girls in town. 
TOLA ROSENBERG (WIFE): [CHUCKLING] 

