INT: OK, Mrs. Billauer, each tape's 30 minutes long. About a minute before it ends, Peter will tap me on the shoulder. And you'll see him tap me on the shoulder, so you'll know you have another minute-- 

EB: OK. 

INT: --To wrap up the first tape and then we start again. 

CREW: [NON-ENGLISH]? [INTERPOSING VOICES] 
EB: Not a Polish name. 

CREW: No. 
EB: Billauer. 

CREW: March 1, 1995. The survivor, Engelina Billauer. Interviewer, Carol Weisman, Santa Monica, USA. And it's in English. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] OK, we're on. 

INT: Good morning. 

EB: Good morning. 

INT: Would you please tell us your name, your date of birth, and where you were born? 

EB: OK. My name is Engelina Billauer. I was born in Berlin, Germany on July 29, 1927. 

INT: Mrs. Billauer, your mother was [? Toby ?] Nochem, N-O-C-H-E-M. 

EB: That's right. 

INT: And your father was George Lowenberg-- 

EB: That's right. 

INT: L-O-W-E-N-B-E-R-G. 

EB: That's right. 

INT: Would you please tell us about your mother and father? 

EB: It's 50 years [INAUDIBLE]. My parents were both handicapped. They couldn't speak, and they couldn't hear. So as a small child, I learned sign language. And I didn't think it was anything special because it came natural to me. And I have an older sister and an other brother. My parents-- my father was a tailor. My mother was a housekeeper. But she did some sewing at home. We were poor, but [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my parents-- we were their pride. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was born in 1927. And in 1932, I started going to public school. 1933, I had to leave the public school, because I was one of the very few Jewish children there. And I was sent to a Jewish girl school. The school was about 45 minutes to walk. So my mother used to walk with me every morning and pick me up from school. Wherever my parents had to do something in an office, or shopping, I went with them to interpret. Because my brother and sister were already old enough to go to work. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And in doing-- after 1933, of course, we were very conscious that we were Jews. And people-- we had only Jewish friends, actually. Near our Jewish school was a Gentile-- a regular public school. And those kids would throw rocks at us, in the winter would cover stones with snow and throw at us, and yell at us, and call us names. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] didn't really affect me. I guess I was young. I didn't really understand what was going on. 

INT: At about five or six years when you left your Jewish school-- 

EB: The Gentile school. 

INT: --the Gentile school, did your parents explain why you had to leave? 

EB: No. I don't know if my parents even understood what was going on. But no. I mean, I realized that I was different than the others. And I was very happy in the Jewish school. And on November 9th, 1938, when I went to school, on the way I saw that all the Jewish stores were destroyed, that all synagogues were burning. But I still went to school. And, of course, we were right away released to go back home. On the way home, again, I saw all of the Jewish stores destroyed, glass all over the place, the sign, Jews, written all over. And many of my friends' parents-- fathers, mostly of Polish descent, were arrested. Some were sent to Pol-- back to Poland, and some were sent to concentration camps then. The Sachsenhausen, as I remember, was one of the first concentration camps we knew about in Germany. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And in-- after that 9th of November, the Jewish school, especially the girls' school, was closed because they didn't get coal to heat it in the winter time. So we were merged with a Jewish boys' school, which was also quite far from my home. But in 1940, they closed all Jewish schools. So I had to work in a Jewish children's home for a while, making beds, darning socks, and things like that. My sister already had worked forced labor for Siemens, a big German company. And my brother already had-- had died. He committed suicide in 1938. 

INT: And how old was he then? 

EB: 1938. He was nine years older than me, so he was 18. 

INT: 18. He committed suicide? 

EB: Yes. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Which I first didn't know either. My mother never-- I mean, I-- I was sent to a-- to a Jewish home, because I was undernourished. So they sent me for a week. And in that week, this happened. And when I came home, I didn't ask any questions and my parents didn't say anything. But I had to go shopping one day. And some stranger told me, oh, I heard your brother killed himself. That's how I found out. But I don't think I ever questioned it, because I didn't want to hurt my mother's feelings. 

INT: And so you never discussed it with your parents? 

EB: No. I knew that it must be painful. 

INT: Did you discuss it with your sister, Frieda? 

EB: No, she just said, you know, he couldn't go on, and he put an end to it. 

INT: What do you remember about your brother? 

EB: Tall, good looking, looking like 10 goyim. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] He was much older, so I know going for walks with him. But I don't really remember that much about him. My sister and I, we were in camp together, so we were very close. 

INT: Did you have grandparents that were alive? 

EB: No. I never knew my grandparents. I never knew any of-- my mother had no relatives that we knew about. My father had two sisters, but I didn't really know them. They didn't live near Berlin, so I-- I never had a chance to really meet them. I mean, he came from a bigger family. But they all had died already before I was born, because I was a late comer. My mother was 42, and I was born. So I was really very, very young in the family. So I didn't know anybody. 

INT: You had mentioned to me that you were involved in a special synagogue for the handicapped. 

EB: Yes. 

INT: Can you tell us about that? 

EB: Sure, on-- being-- my parents being handicapped, they go-- they went to a special synagogue in Berlin where there was a big school for children that can speak and hear. And in that same facilities, they had a synagogue. I remember that on Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, and most high holidays, we used to go there. And what stuck in my mind is that the rabbi was speaking, but at the same time doing sign language for people to understand. I have never seen anything like that ever since. And this was a social gathering for my parents and their friends. And I didn't feel out of place. It was very natural to me. 

INT: And outside the synagogue, were most of your parents' friends handicapped? 

EB: Yes. 

INT: And so you socialized with the children all the time? 

EB: I don't really remember. Because I was so young, their children probably were all older, so I didn't socialize with them. I spent a lot of time just with my parents. And of course, when we couldn't use subways or buses anymore, I couldn't go any place. So I spent-- spent most of my time with my parents, which I'm very happy about. 

INT: What did you think about during the day? What was your everyday life like with your parents now that you couldn't go to school? 

EB: My father went to work. My sister was at work. My mother and I liked to go for walks. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My mother liked dress making, so we would go and look in windows and see what the latest fashion was. And then my mother would go home and take one of our old dresses and just remodel it to a new style. And we would go-- she loved to go to the movies. [LAUGHS] And sometimes we would walk far away, hide our stars, and go into the movie. And in the evening, we would go and pick my father up from work. And when the war started and it was dark-- everything had to be dark-- we went and picked him up from work and brought him home. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was-- I'm happy that I spent all that time. 

INT: When you were home with your-- with you parents and your sister, Frieda, did you discuss politics? Did you talk about Hitler and think this would all blow over? 

EB: No. No. As I said, I don't know if my parents really understood what was going on. I mean, they were reading newspapers, I'm sure. But they never discussed it with us. Never. My sister being at work, in forced labor, of course, knew, understood, more about it. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we had no relatives in a foreign country. So there was no way for us to run away or do anything. We just hoped for the best. And nobody knew really what was going to happen. Nobody realized that things would be that bad. When the deportations started, we would see moving trucks, big moving trucks, coming and picking up people. But, you know, there was a rumor-- oh, you're just being sent to a ghetto. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we waited till our time came. 

INT: And when was that? 

EB: On September 24th, 1942. At 11:00 at night, two Gestapo men came, knocked on the door, and told us to pack a few things and come with them. My sister, who worked for this German company, she didn't have to go. But she volunteered to go with us. So we packed a few things, and they took us by public transportation to a big synagogue that they had [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] pointed out-- had made to a place where they put-- brought all the people that they arrested that night were put into this synagogue. The seats were all taken out. People were sitting on their suit cases. Old people, young people, babies, retarded people, all kinds of people. And when we came in there, the SS men in charge called my sister and me up to the bimah-- he was sitting at the bimah-- and asked us several questions. And then he said, are you sure you are 100% Jewish? Are your grandparents Jewish? And we said, yes, we are 100% Jewish. So he let us go. In this place, we were about three days. On September 27, 1942, we were led through Berlin-- a transport of 1,000 Jews-- through Berlin to a station-- to a railway station. There was already a train of-- we didn't know then, but there were-- it was a train of 250 young women from Frankfurt am Main. They were already waiting for us. We were loaded on the trains, and off we went. Nobody knew where we were going. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The elderly people, they knew already which direction. So when we came to a certain point, they know we are not going to Poland. So everybody felt at ease, because there was a rumor that, when you're sent to Poland, it's very bad. We was-- our train was going to Riga, Latvia. The train stopped a few times on the way, but only for the German soldiers to get water or food. We didn't get anything. When we stopped in Riga, they took 70 young men off the train. One of these young men was a-- has been a friend of mine. We stayed there a few hours, but then the train left. And we ended up in Estonia. On October 1st, we arrived in Estonia. The train stopped on an open field. We were told to get out the train, stand next to the train in-- in a line, and the SS men started doing their thing, right or left. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The SS men picked my sister, and me, and a few other young girls to stay behind to clean up the tracks, because the tracks had-- were standing there overnight. People used the bathroom or facilities, whatever there was. And we had to clean it up. But my sister and I saw that our parents were sent on a bus. So we ran to the bus, and we were inside the bus sitting next to them. Then the SS men came and said, I told you to clean up the tracks. Get off the bus. You will see them later. And we believed it. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [INAUDIBLE]. We got off the bus, and this is the last time we ever saw our parents. [CRYING] After we cleaned up the tracks, we had to walk, you know, many, many miles to a camp. And, of course, our first thought was, where are our parents? So we were told, oh, they're in another camp. You'll see them. And first, we believed it. We was put into a big, big barrack that had three floors of-- not beds-- of-- it had three floors. And this was our place to sleep. No covers, nothing, just the clothes we had on. And of course, it was a big, big excitement, because everybody was looking for their relatives. And it was horrible. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then the SS men came in and took away all the jewelry that the women had. It was only women. All the jewelry. And of course, a few women didn't want to give up their wedding bands. So they were taken out, and never heard of them again. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The next day, we were sent to-- to work. They had accumulated all the luggage from all the camps, from all the transports, 250 from Frankfurt and the thousand of-- from Berlin to unpack the luggage and to sort it. So many people had food in their luggage, and we tried to steal it. But in the evening, when you finish work, they would check you out. And if they found food, that wasn't very healthy for you. We were in that camp maybe three months. In the spring of 1943, we were loaded to-- on buses and sent-- we didn't know where. It turned out to be Tallinn. It was in the middle of the night, a full moon. We stopped at a place like in the Middle Ages, a prison with big, white, stone walls. Had to go through the basement where the-- the stone steps were all blocked off, through hallways. Through another hallway. Came to a-- a little more modern building, and it was all dark. They would count 10 women, lock the door-- these iron doors. And there was no light. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] A few minutes later, after they locked the doors, the lights went on, and we saw it was a cell with seven beds against the wall, one toilet, and one sink. But we were 10 women. So the younger ones-- seven women were sleeping in beds, and the three younger ones, we were sleeping on the floor. 

INT: Were you one of the younger ones sleeping on the floor? 

EB: I was always the youngest. There was one other girl that was-- she lives in Israel. The two of us were always the youngest. We were only 15 then. 

INT: And you were still with Frieda at this point, right? 

EB: Yes, always. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there, in the morning, they would open the doors. They would throw in some raw fish. That was our breakfast. But we had to-- before we went to work, the cell floor had to be scrubbed with cold water. They didn't give us anything to do it. We had to scrub it. Everything had to be tip top. They would come in and check and check and count us. I don't know what they thought, [LAUGHS] that somebody could have disappeared. Then we were led down to the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to the street. And there was a-- there were civilians with guns surrounding us. We found out later that these were Polish-- Polish people-- Polish men. And one man in a leather coat with a red, long beard would make a speech. Turned out he was a-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] he was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a man who was in charge of a German construction company. He would give us a speech that if we work-- we go to work, then nobody can run away. If one disappears, ten will be shot. And they led us through Tallinn to a shipyard. That shipyard had been destroyed by the Russians when they moved back. So we had, first, to clean up the rubble. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] that took a while. After the rubble-- and it was winter then. It was very cold. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] After we had cleaned up the rubble, we had to-- a certain group of us young girls were taught brick laying. Some women worked for deep sea-- for divers. Some were working in the factory. And we were a group that was picked to learn bricklaying. So we had to start to build up the ship yard. [LAUGHS] So-- but we got extra food from the-- from the German company. We got every day a piece of bread and hot soup. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] One of the-- there were several German foreman in charge for each group. The one man who taught us bricklaying happened to be from Frankfurt am Main. And-- 

INT: He was a Jewish man? 

EB: No, Gentile. 

INT: OK. 

EB: But because my girlfriends were from Frankfurt, he-- he liked us. So he gave us extra soup sometimes. He did a lot of things that were probably very dangerous, and he didn't realize how dangerous it was. And he-- as a matter of fact, after the war when we were in the United States, we did invite him to come and visit us. And every Christmas, we would send him some gifts, some food, to Germany. But that's the only German [LAUGHS] I know who was nice. And I-- I would think that he was only nice because we were young girls. He wasn't so nice to the other. I mean, women were 30 and 40, to us, they were already old ladies. To them, he wasn't so nice. But in a situation like that, you take what comes. [LAUGHS] And we worked there for a long time. 

INT: How many hours a day did you work, about? 

EB: Oh, about 10 hours a day. We were bought in the morning and bought back in the evening. 

INT: When you say brought, were you-- were you-- did you walk there? 

EB: Marched. 

INT: You had to march there? 

EB: We marched, and always surrounded by these Polish guards with guns. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And one day we didn't go to work. We didn't know what was happening. And it turned out we were sent to another camp. By train, we were sent deeper into Estonia near the Russian border. The camp was Ereda, I think. There were already people-- Polish men and women-- separate, of course. But there was already a camp. And this Lagerfuhrer, he was-- he was terrible. He was walking around with sticks, hitting everybody. It was just terrible. From there, they also sent us out every day to work, to dig ditches, to cut down trees, to build railroads, to transport heavy machinery on-- put it on the truck, and then the truck would deliver it somewhere else. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] food was always very, very limited. Clothes, we didn't have much either. The winter was very, very cold. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't know how we managed, but the only thing I can say is because we were young. And I guess you get accustomed to any routine. 

INT: Were you with the same 10 girls-- the other nine girls that you had been with in Tallinn prison? 

EB: We were always together. 

INT: Always together. 

EB: But then we-- we cut down to five, and we were only five girls. And we were together all the time, shared everything together. Every little piece of bread we-- we found or we got, we cut in five pieces. 

INT: Were these girls that you knew from home? 

EB: No. 

INT: Or you met them in Tallinn? 

EB: I met them in camp. My sister and I were the only one from Berlin. The others were from Frankfurt. And they had lost their parents too. They had worked in Berlin as-- also as forced laborers. 

INT: Mrs. Billauer, what was the man's name, the-- the German man in Tallinn Prison, who was very helpful to all of you? 

EB: His name was Homan, Mr. Homan, Fritz Homan. 

INT: Fritz Homan, OK. 

EB: He was from Frankfurt, and-- and in the meantime, he passed away already. 

INT: OK. Now you're in Ereda. 

EB: Ereda, yes. 

INT: Ereda. 

EB: After a while, we were sent to another camp not too far away, which was called Goldfields. This was completely empty. Only the barracks were standing there. We had to build it. We had to-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we had to bricklay some chimneys. And after a week, a transport of Polish and Latvia, Jews from Vilna and-- and Kovno mostly, came there. And a few weeks later, a transport of Hungarian women came. And they came already with shaved heads, from Auschwitz. That's the first time we ever heard of Auschwitz. We had no idea. 

INT: And do you remember about what year this was? 

EB: It must've been 1943, late 1943. 

INT: And-- and tell me again the name of the camp. 

EB: Goldfields. 

INT: Goldfields. 

EB: Yeah. There also we, every night, every morning, every night, you had to stand appell and they would count. And one morning, a new Lagerfuhrer came, who happened to be from Frankfurt am Main, too. And he probably knew that there were some women. So he asked who is from Frankfurt am Main, and some of the women raised their hands, and we were standing between those. So he picked five, my sister and me and my three girlfriends, to work in the kitchen, which was, of course, a big plus. And least we didn't have to be working out in the cold. We worked in the kitchen. But every night, most every night, the Lagerfuhrer would come in drunk. We didn't know what he was going, didn't know what to expect of him. But he would come in, look if we were all there, and just go out again. But we were always scared when he came. He was, he picked us to work in the kitchen, which was very nice, but he was a bastard. He was killing and-- and beating men and women wherever he saw them. Most of the time, he was drunk. In Goldfields, we had our heads shorn. They shaved our hair everywhere, under arms, wherever you had hair, that's what they shaved off. And after a while, they were every day, they took people out. We never saw them again. But then one day, they had a big action. They needed a big amount of people. And they picked me with-- among others. But I guess they needed a certain amount, and they didn't have enough. So they asked for volunteers. 

INT: Excuse me. When you say they had an action, what do you mean-- what do you mean? 

EB: In German, you say [GERMAN], that means a selection. 

INT: OK. 

EB: So they asked for volunteers. Of course my sister volunteered. And our three girlfriends volunteered, too. This SS man who was picking was standing in front. Behind him was this Lagerfuhrer. And he made like this to us. We didn't know what he meant. But after the selection, we were supposed to report for the next morning. My girlfriend, who was really very courageous, always spoke up, she went to him and she said, what does that mean? So he said, you are crazy. I could have taken one girl out, but how can I take five girls out? But he did. But instead of us five, he sent five other women to their death. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But as I said, I mean, we were lucky that there was always somebody who was good to us. Not good, but who saved us somehow. After-- the camp got smaller and smaller, so we didn't work in the kitchen anymore. We had to go out and work again. I had to work in the SS laundry, or in cutting trees again, or dig ditches for the-- the German soldiers, which were not SS. The German army was around there, too. And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] there was very difficult times, too. But then-- then the-- the war, the Russians came closer and closer. So the Germans just closed the camp, and sent us, wanted to send us back to Germany. We were again on a train, and the train was going. We were supposed to go to Tallinn, which was the place to get the-- the boat. But they needed the ship for German army, so they just let us out on an empty field. It was a tremendous big field. I think it was September, October, 1944. 

INT: Do you know the name of the field. 

EB: Lagedi. 

INT: Lagedi. 

EB: We were there for three weeks in the open air. There were bombs. Some women were killed. I don't know where-- if it was the Russians or who the bombs were. But somebody must have looked after us, because all these three weeks it didn't rain once. Of course, there was no sanitary facilities. And all these years, none of the women had their periods, because the Germans had put something in the food so that we don't have it, which in a way was a blessing. And after three weeks they finally loaded us on a big ship. Of course, we were on the bottom of the boat. 

INT: Did you have any food during those three weeks? 

EB: I guess there must have been something, but not more than water and bread. And toilet facilities were just, they dug a big hole and that was it. And we were loaded on the-- on the boat, on the bottom. A lot of women were sea sick. I don't know how long it took for the boat to go to Danzig, Germany. When we arrived there we were loaded on little boats and were sent down the river to a concentration camp, which we find out was Stutthof. I should have, I mean, we had had bad experiences, but Stutthof was just unbelievable. First we were in a quarantine. They took away all our clothes and gave us just rags, torn rages. The Kapos were real criminals. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I remember that there was one woman, she was a doctor, and somehow she must have had poison with her, safe. And she killed herself there, she took poison there. We were in quarantine about a week. Then we were sent to the regular concentration camp. We were pushed into a big barrack at night, no room to lie down, just sitting up. And then they would come with cold water, hoses, spraying on us. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In the morning, we were let out again. Standing appell was-- the whole of the day. And sometimes they would ask for volunteers to go to work. We would push ourselves every day to volunteer, to get out. But we were never picked. In a way, that was luck too, because all these women that went out for voluntary work never came back. I have never heard of any of them. But after three weeks in-- in Stutthof, they finally selected a bigger group of women, and we were sent to Hamburg to work in an ammunition factory. Hamburg was, I mean, we were just in a camp near this factory. The main camp in Hamburg was Neuengamme. It was a big concentration camp. And I understand there were lot little camps around Hamburg working in different factories. But the main thing was Neuengamme. 

INT: What was Echsenzoll in Hamburg? 

EB: Ochsenzoll. That was the name we were. 

INT: Oh, OK. 

EB: That was the camp that we stayed in order to work for the factory. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We worked 12 hour shifts. My sister and I never saw each other because we were on different shifts. And the camp commander, he was horrible. He was hitting, wherever he saw one of us, he was hit. We also, at night, when we came from our shifts, tired, we had to stand appell again. Sometimes we would stand all night in freezing weather and rain. And had to go right from there back to work. 

INT: What did you think about when you-- when you had to stand all night? What thoughts went through your head? 

EB: We have to stick it out. We have to live through it. And, you know, we told each other that we have to-- to hold on. It was a big support, five girls sticking together through everything, supporting each other. One was down, the other one would cheer you up. One of the women who, sorry, passed away last year, she was such down to earth person. She would always cheer us up. And it-- it was-- was very helpful. It was really very, very-- Also women from there disappeared, and we don't know what happened to them. Bombs were falling. By then, the British were bombing, or the Americans. I guess the British. But we were happy. Even the idea that we could be killed by the bombs didn't bother us, as long as we knew that the war was coming to an end. 

INT: So while you were in Ochsenzoll, you-- you worked for a German ammunition factory. What did you do? What was your job in the factory? 

EB: I worked on a machine that made [GERMAN]-- what is that? 

INT: Grenade. 

EB: Grenades, yeah. You know, Molotov cocktail, or whatever you call it. And the oil that-- that was in the machine, my arms were all black because it got stuck into your skin. It was, and then, of course, it got bad. But there was no-- no medical help, and no sanitary facilities at all. Very, very poor. We worked there in the winter time. We had no underwear. We wear wooden shoes. I had to go to work every day, come back, stand appell at night. And then a-- I think it was in early April, or maybe March-- one day the-- the camp commander told us that Roosevelt had died. And he said, now there's no chance for you. You know, we Germans are going to win the war and you're going to die. A few days after, they loaded us on trains again, and we were sent to Bergen-Belsen. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] When we got off the train in Bergen-Belsen, a transport of men had just arrived, too. So there were dead bodies all over the place. Some dead, some half dead, it was horrible. We had to march to the camp, and there was a terrible smell. And we asked, what is that smell? And the SS women, who were worse than the man, told us, oh, that's-- you're gonna smell like that pretty soon too, because you're gonna-- you're gonna be soap. We're going to make soap out of you. So we came to this camp, which was the worst ever. It was hell on earth-- dead bodies. We were put in the barracks, didn't go to work. We were just sitting there. Most people were already sick with typhus. Sometimes they would call us to clear the roads of dead people or people that were half dead. They didn't care. We had to put them all on a big pile. I'm sure when you see, remember seeing the movies of Bergen-Belsen, you see the piles of dead bodies. That's what we had to do. One day, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we saw Germans walking around with white arm bands, and we didn't know what it meant. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we didn't, but we heard shooting going on outside the camp. And some people said, oh, you know, maybe the war's coming to an end-- maybe, maybe. And one day, big tanks drove into the camp. We were all too weak to even go outside. And we didn't even know who they are. We had never seen tanks with these stars on it. But then they announced in all languages that we are liberated. So we were liberated by the British Army. We-- this was a moment I never forget. [CRYING] We were too sick, really, to do anything. But just the idea that we were free was something we had dreamed about. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And of course the barracks were all infested with typhus and all that. One of my girlfriends who was always fast said, let's get out of here. And we went to the barracks that the German SS women had occupied. So we went, and we stayed there. The British came. They weren't prepared for what they saw. They tried to feed us their army rations and all this, but our stomachs were not prepared for this kind of food, so many, many people died after that, yet. 

INT: When you went to the barracks where the SS women were, where were they? 

EB: They were already arrested. They were arrested. And that was one of the glorious moments, too. That when they arrested them, and the Lagerfuhrer-- Kramer was his name-- we were all standing around. You know. 

INT: You watched it. 

EB: Yeah, that was-- and people were even throwing stones at them. And there was a big trial in Luneberg, and they were hanged, most of them. And the British came around and picked-- no, they came, and they send us to another place in Bergen-Belsen, which was before occupied by the German army. It was a big, big, big blocks of houses, which were occupied by the German Army. And they had thrown them out, and they put us in there. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But then the British went from one room to the other to find sick people. I was one of them, and two other girls. They took us by ambulance to a place where they took off all our clothes, washed us, and put clean things on us. And then put us in different houses. My sister didn't know what happened to me, so she went all over until she found me, very sick, in one of those hospital rooms. 

INT: And she was not sick? 

EB: She was sick in Hamburg, already, in Ochsenzoll. She had that. But nobody knew. I didn't even know. They didn't tell me. They always told me that she had an infection in her ears. So she had it already. Because as soon as the Lagerfuhrer would know that somebody is sick, they would send them away. So they told him some [NON-ENGLISH] that wasn't true. And in Bergen-Belsen, after I get better, a-- there was-- the Swedish took a lot of survivors to Sweden. But we still had the mentality that they might separate us. So my sister and a girlfriend came every day to visit me in the hospital. They would tell the doctor, oh, we take her for a walk. They took me for a walk so I get a little bit stronger. And one day they took me out, and they never bought me back, because we were afraid that they would send us, separate us to go to Sweden, which they, I'm sure, would have never done. We stayed, and my 18th birthday was, I was free. So we had a little party. And then from other concentration camps, men came to look for German Jews who had survived. That's when my sister [LAUGHS] met her husband. He's also-- he was also from Germany. And she had known him before. He was married before and he had a child before. And she-- she moved to-- to Lubeck with them. But I was not too-- I guess I was jealous. Now that I am more adult, I know I was jealous. I didn't like him. He took my sister away from me. So I went with my girlfriends to live in Frankfurt am Main. But I was there only three months. My sister came and she said, this is no place for you. You better come and live with me. 

INT: Where-- where-- you said Lubeck? 

EB: Lubeck. It's near Hamburg. It's an old Hanseatic town in Germany. 

INT: What were your friends' names, these three girls from Frankfurt? 

EB: Liesel, Ilsa, Trauta. 

INT: Were they related? 

EB: No. No. 

INT: They were just friends from Frankfurt. They knew each other. 

EB: No, they didn't know each other before, either. We all met in concentration camp. And, unfortunately, my sister was the oldest. She died 17 years ago. Last year, the other one, the next oldest, died. So now we're only three left. But we're very close. One of the girlfriends is an artist. She gave me this sculpture. 

INT: Beautiful. Where do they live? 

EB: In New York. 

INT: Oh they're-- oh, they're in America. 

EB: Yes, I mean, I lived in New York for 30 years, for 33 years. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] When we-- I moved to Lubeck, and my brother-in-law was very active in Jewish life. So we were. I met a lot of important people. I don't know if you remember the time when we had exodus, and the British sent the two boats back. That was near us, Hamburg, and they brought those people to a camp near Lubeck. So we were very active working there. A lot of Israeli [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] chalutzim-- not chalutzim-- but important Israeli leaders came, and British, and American. A lot of people came to help. And finally, it was resolved, and people were-- did go to Israel. And in 1946, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] there was a small Jewish community in Lubeck. Every Sunday was a wedding, and everybody was invited to the wedding. And one day, [INAUDIBLE] I met my husband. His father was in the same town that I lived, and I knew him. And one day, he-- my husband came from Russia to find his father. That's how we met. And in 1947, his father remarried. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And-- 

INT: His mother had died, your mother had died-- 

EB: His mother, she died in the Warsaw ghetto, yes. And they, then was the time when the British gave affidavits to go to-- to Palestine then. So my husband volunteered to-- wanted to go to Palestine, because he had all his relatives and his younger brother who had survived concentration camp. But the Jewish agency told him, you're young, you can go on [? a later date, ?] but we'll give your parents the affidavit to go to Israel. So they went to Israel. And my husband stayed in Lubeck. In 1949, we went for a visit to Israel. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we, his father decided we should get married there. And I said, no, I don't get married. I only have one sister. I wouldn't get married without my sister. So the telephone calls went back and forth, and my sister-- who had already a child-- left the child with friends and came to Israel. She brought a suitcase full of food, because at that time was [? haTsena ?] in Israel. There was hardly anything to eat. So they brought all the food for the wedding. We got married. And went back to Germany, because we had decided we going to the States. Went back to Germany, my oldest son was born in Germany. 

INT: I want to stop there. 

EB: Yes. 

INT: I don't want-- I don't want you to forget this, but I want to go back and ask you more about the camps. 

EB: Sure. Yeah. 

INT: Because you went through seven or eight camps. 

EB: Yes. 

INT: And I'm curious, you were lucky that you had your-- your sister-- lucky-- I mean, you had your sister-- 

EB: Oh, if it wouldn't be for my sister, I would never have survived. 

INT: And your three friends. And that really helped you. That gave you a lot of strength. But what else helped you? What did you think about? I mean, did-- 

EB: What did I think about? I dreamed about a piece of bread and a toilet to myself. A nice, clean bed. And I felt that after Shoah, that I, somebody has to be surviving to tell this story. 

INT: And at this point, what-- what did you know about your parents? Had you gotten any information? 

EB: By that time-- no, by that time we realized that they were, that they were killed. And from what we found out later, they were killed right the first day we got there. 

INT: Yeah, when they went around that bus. 

EB: A bus, they just put them somewhere. 

INT: And-- and during these terrible atrocities that you were witness to, what did you say to yourself? Did you ever think, when I get out of here, if I get out of here, I'm going to tell the world-- 

EB: Oh yes, absolutely. And we thought the world would be out there with open arms. And there would never be war or-- or bad things happening again. Surprise. Didn't happen this way. But when we were liberated, we were so happy. We were so free, things didn't-- material things didn't mean anything. It was just a wonderful feeling that we had, and being together. We never went back to Berlin because we knew we wouldn't find anybody there, anyway. 

INT: Thank you. 
INT: Mrs. Billauer, tell us the names, please, of your three friends-- their-- their first name and maiden name. 

EB: OK. One was Trauta Katzenstein. The second one is Liesel Fart. And the third one is Ilsa Vetahan. These are their maiden names. 

INT: You stayed together the entire time. 

EB: Yes. 

INT: Did anything ever happen to you in the camps that you never told anybody? You talked about the-- the commander who came in drunk every night. You were afraid of him. Did anything ever happen that you've always-- that you've been afraid to admit? 

EB: No. I'm always very open. I never kept anything. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Nothing. There is one incident, but I-- I talked about it. In Stutthof, all the women also were lined up for a examination, for female examination. But we were standing in line, and my girlfriend Trauta, when it was almost my turn, she started making like a-- a panic. And then she pushed me out of the way so that I would be on the line where the women already had their physical. So-- because she didn't want me to have this woman's [LAUGHS] examination. So little things like that they-- we did for each other. Or in Hamburg, Ochsenzoll, she worked as a-- as a shoemaker in the camp. So when I came home from the factory, she would take my shoes. And by the morning when I had to go back to work, she would already have fixed them or so-- and little things like that, you know. And I was the youngest. I have to admit, even then they spoiled me. They gave into everything that I-- you know, I was crying a lot. And they always mothered me. They still do today, as a matter of fact. And no. it was-- it was really-- it's a fantastic relationship. If one of us needs it, they would come immediately. My sister was sick for so many years, and there wasn't a day we didn't get together. It was really-- this is-- it's closer than-- than-- than blood relatives, actually. And none of them have any relatives. So we are all we have. We have each other. And our children are, you know-- we always joke that our children have three Jewish mothers. [LAUGHS] So it's-- it's something that you can't-- you can't replace friendship like this. I'm just sorry that I moved to California, and they're in-- in New York. But we still talk to each other on the phone and get together whenever we can. 

INT: I'm amazed at-- at the instincts for survival-- 

EB: It is. 

INT: --when I hear you-- when I hear you talk. 

EB: It is. But I must say, I think it's because we were young. We were young. You know, the other women already were married and had children. So their-- their mood was different than ours. We were young, and we didn't even think of tomorrow. We thought every day that we live through will bring us closer to-- to liberation, hopefully. 

INT: Do you ever think-- a wild idea-- of trying to escape the camps or how you could-- 

EB: There was no way. How could you escape? In Estonia, we didn't know the language. Our hair-- we had no hair. We had no clothes. How could we escape in the middle of nowhere? And in other concentration camps, I mean, there were always guards. How could you escape? No way. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] 

INT: We talked before about you met your husband. What was his name? 

EB: His name is Richard Billauer. He came to look for his father, and he found his father and me. [LAUGHS] 

INT: And his father's name was? 

EB: Israel. 

INT: Israel Billauer. 

EB: Israel Billauer. Unfortunately, he died last year. He was a survivor of the Warsaw ghetto and Majdanek, Auschwitz, Sachsenhausen, and Buchenwald. [SIGHS] My husband has a younger brother who also survived the Warsaw ghetto and Auschwitz-- just pure miracle that a boy that young survived. 

INT: And what was his age? 

EB: He was-- when I-- he was 13. 

INT: When he was deported, he was 13? 

EB: Right. Yes. 

INT: What was his first name? 

EB: Adam. 

INT: Adam? 

EB: And he lives in Israel now. But he-- he's different. He doesn't wanna talk about his experience at all. Also, my father-in-law never wanted to talk about it. They would never have agreed to an interview or anything. So everybody has-- is different. I'm always very open about it. I told my children as soon as they were old enough to understand. First of all, they ask questions. How come we don't have two sets of grandparents? We don't have uncles, and aunts, and cousins. And also to other people-- I'm always very open about it. 

INT: I think it's important that everyone things you are. 

EB: I think so too. Even my-- my grandchildren-- I mean, the oldest, who is now 18-- but when he was much younger and he saw pictures of my husband's real mother-- but he only knew the-- the second wife of my-- of his grandfather. He said, how could that be? So then we explained to him what happened. And he's very much into it. He went on his own to the Wiesenthal Center, to the museum. He went to Washington, to the museum. And he reads about it. He saw Schindler's List. He's much more into it than the 16-year-old. But he'll get there too. And every Passover, of course, we are here together. And when we read the Haggadah, I always make it a point that this is history, but there's a recent history, and that we are, I am, like these people from Exodus. And this year, it turns out that April 15th, our liberation day, is also Passover. 

INT: Is Passover. That's right. 

EB: So-- 

INT: You are a witness. 

EB: --I get my speech ready. 

INT: That's right. You were a witness to history-- 

EB: That's it. 

INT: --for sure. 

EB: All right. 

INT: Let's go back to Frieda, your sister, when she met her husband. What is her husband's name? 

EB: Norbert Wallheim. 

INT: And she went back to Germany, right? 

EB: We all lived in Germany-- 

INT: Right. 

EB: --after. We didn't leave Germany until 1951. We came to the States. And I always-- we always lived with my sister. 

INT: So after-- after you were liberated and you left Bergen-- 

EB: Belsen. 

INT: You left Bergen-Belsen after you were feeling stronger. 

EB: Yes. And we-- 

INT: How did you get back to-- 

EB: Lubeck. 

INT: Lubeck. Tell me how you got back to Lubeck and-- and what you did, what your life was like. You were still-- 

EB: It was-- 

INT: --very young. 

EB: Yes, I was young. I was 18. As I said, my brother-in-law was very active in Jewish life. He came to Lubeck because of an-- he was liberated by the American army. And one of the soldiers had told her-- took a whole group of survivor-- Jewish survivors and said, I'll bring you to the British zone, because the place you are liberated will be Russian. And I think you're better off in the British zone. That's how he landed in Lubeck. And when I came to Lubeck in beginning of '46, they lived in a house that had belonged to a Jewish banker who didn't come back. So the Germans had given us that house to live in. And it was a very [LAUGHS] sociable life there, because all people from all over the world came to-- to see survivors and ask questions-- sometimes silly questions. [LAUGHS] But it was-- it was interesting. I-- I learned dressmaking, and I learned typewriting. And I learned shorthand. All kinds of things I learned to-- to be able to do something later on. But when we came back from-- but we knew we would never stay in Germany. That was something we knew from the beginning. When we-- I went with my husband to Israel for a visit. I knew it was a visit, because my sister had told me that she would move to the United States. And there was no question that we would separate. So it was no-- it was fact that I was-- that we were going to the United States too. 

INT: When you were in Lubeck, when you went back, did you still feel anti-Semitism? 

EB: No. No. Not at all. Then, they were, you know-- everybody-- every German had a Jewish doctor or a-- a Jewish friend, and-- and no German knew what happened to the Jews. 

INT: Of course not. [LAUGHS] 

EB: No. So no. You'd-- in that time, you didn't feel anything. No. We-- and we had a good life. We had a very good life there. 

INT: How long did-- 

EB: But we knew it wasn't permanent. 

INT: And how long did you stay there before you left? 

EB: We left in 1951 for the United States. So it's about six years we lived there. 

INT: So you went to Israel before you were married. Right to-- 

EB: Yeah. We were engaged, and we went to Israel for a visit. And my father-in-law said, let me make the wedding. And we got married in Israel. But then when we went back to Germany, the Germans didn't recognize the Israeli marriage. So we had to get married in-- in Germany again. But-- 

INT: And-- and were you working when you first got married? 

EB: No. No. But I have been working ever since we got married. [LAUGHTER] 

INT: OK. We'll come to that. I-- I want to-- I want sort of a chronological order of-- of what happened. So you stayed in Lubeck for a couple of years. Then you came. 

EB: My son was born. 

INT: First-- and what is your son's name? 

EB: George-- 

INT: George. 

EB: --after my father. 

INT: OK. And you-- how old was George when you came to the United States? 

EB: George was six weeks old when we came by plane to the United States. And we had a contract to go to California from the HIAS. We landed in New York. Friends picked us up, took us to their home, and said, why do you want to go to California? You don't know anybody there. Here, we can help you. So we gave up the help from HIAS, and we stayed in New York. And the apartment house we lived in in the Bronx, there was a couple that happen-- the man happened to be in concentration camp with my father-in-law. So he was very helpful. He right away got a job for my husband. He was a watchmaker then. And we stayed in New York for 33 years until my oldest son, George, went to UCLA for a semester, came back to New York, and said, California is for me. 

INT: [LAUGHS] 

EB: So he got married and left for California. We used to come every year to visit. A few years later, my youngest son, Michael, decided he wants to go to California [LAUGHS] too. So we made the decision to let him go. And after that, my oldest son wrote us a letter. I'm sure my husband has the copy-- writing that we are such a small family and that we should be together; that we should know our grandchildren; our grandchildren should know us; and that would be the right thing for us to do. So we agreed. We sold-- my sister had already passed away. So we sold our business. We sold our home. We left our friends. And we moved to California. And I'm not sorry we did. It's-- it's really our biggest pleasure is when we are the whole family together. 

INT: Absolutely. 

EB: It's really such a pleasure. 

INT: When we met before this interview, I asked you about your education since 1945. Do you remember what you answered? 

EB: Life. 

INT: Life. 

EB: That's right. Yes. I never did go back to school, which I'm sorry, but-- but life taught me. 

INT: You grew up very quickly. 

EB: I did, yes. I was never a teenager. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But I love life, and I want to live every day the best I can, because you don't know what's tomorrow. And my experiences show me that material things aren't important at all. It's your family that counts. And we really are very close family. My sons have always been very close, though they're six years apart. And my grandchildren, they're special. I'm sure every grandparent says that. [LAUGHTER] And also my daughter-in-laws, I mean, we are really one big happy family-- no problems. 

INT: What are your grandchildren's names? 

EB: Joshua, Jesse, and Jeremy. And if things go well, we're going to have another grandchild in September. 

INT: That's wonderful. 

EB: Yeah. 

INT: I know you and your husband are involved with your sons and their business. 

EB: That's right. 

INT: Would you tell us what you do? 

EB: Both my sons are chiropractors. They are very much involved with sports. My son was the official chiropractor for the last soccer cup games. They are-- we work for them. My husband is the manager, and I am the girl Friday. I do everything that has to be done. My oldest son is very involved to work with young people. He just finished seven years as a voluntary coach for Poly High Soccer Team. My younger son specializes in taking care of little children. He loves and he feels that chiropractic is very important, even on the day you're born. And we-- they have a very good practice, and they have a very good name. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] 

INT: Is there anything that you would like to add that you might have forgotten as you were talking about your experiences in the camps? Or you were in the ghetto from 1940 to 1942-- is there anything that you would like to share that you might have left out? 

EB: It's-- you can talk about it, but nobody that wasn't there can really understand or feel the way we feel. My wish is that it never happens again. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] 

INT: Would you like to leave a message for your sons, your grandchildren, and the rest of the world? 

EB: [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] My sons are very good people. They are-- they are mensch. When my older son was 13, a friend of mine asked him, what do you want to be when you grow up? And he said, the first thing I want to be is a mensch. And he is-- and so is my younger son. They're very good-hearted people. They're good to us. They're good to their wives. They're good to humanity. And I wish them all the luck, the mazel, good health, and happiness. And not to forget the [NON-ENGLISH]. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 

INT: Thank you. 

CREW: OK. 
EB: I have to know which-- [LAUGHS] OK. 

CREW: OK. 
EB: OK? 

CREW: You don't have to touch. You had from the right to left. 
EB: The right is my mother. 

CREW: The name. 

INT: Her name. 

EB: Taube Lowenberg. The baby is me, Engelina Lowenberg Billauer; my sister, in the middle, Frieda Lowenberg; my brother, Wilhelm Lowenberg; and my father, George Lowenberg. 

INT: And when was this picture taken? 

EB: This picture was taken-- I'm six weeks old. So it must be in 1927. 

CREW: In Berlin? 
EB: In Berlin. Yes, I'm sure. 

CREW: OK. 
EB: This picture is of my-- a wedding in my family-- my father's sister's. I'm the only survivor of this whole picture. 

INT: And where was this picture taken? 

EB: This picture was taken in 1939, in Berlin. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] 

CREW: You can go. 
EB: This picture was taken in 1940, in Berlin. That's my mother. And I'm about 13 years old in this picture. 

INT: About how old was your mother in that picture? 

EB: 55? Yes, because she was 57 when we were deported. 

CREW: The names. 
EB: My mother's name was Taube Lowenberg. And that's me, Engelina Lowenberg. 

CREW: OK. 
EB: This picture was taken in Berlin, in 1940. And that's my mother, Taube Lowenberg. 

CREW: OK. 
EB: And this picture is my father, George Lowenberg, taken in Berlin, in 1940. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 

CREW: OK. 
EB: This picture is my sister, Frieda Lowenberg Wallheim, and her husband, Norbert Wallheim. That was taken in 1965. 

CREW: Keep going. Keep going. You had mentioned earlier-- I-- I made a comment that your sister, Frieda, didn't look Jewish. And you said that's probably why we survived. 
EB: That's true. That's true. Wherever we went, even today, people think I'm German. And I always make it my point to let them know that I'm German and Jewish-- not German actually-- Jewish. And the next sentence is always, I'm a survivor of the Holocaust, because I don't want anybody to think I'm German. 

CREW: OK. 
EB: This little blonde is Jeremy. He's six years old. His name is Jeremy Billauer. That's my youngest grandson. The next is Jesse Billauer. He's 16 years old. The next one is Joshua Billauer. He's 18 years old. Next to him is my younger son, Michael Billauer. He is 37 years old. The young man with the beard is my older son, George Billauer, and he is 43 years old. And behind him is his father, Richard Billauer, my husband. 

INT: And where was this picture taken? 

EB: Right here, Thanksgiving, 1994. 

INT: Thank you. 

CREW: OK. 
EB: On the left is my older son, George Billauer. The young lady next to him is his wife, Cecil Billauer. In the middle is my grandson, Jesse Billauer. And on the right side is Joshua Billauer. 

INT: And where was this picture taken? 

EB: This picture was taken in November, 1994. 

INT: Where? 

EB: I suppose in Pacific Palisades. 

INT: California. 

EB: Yes. 

INT: OK. 

CREW: OK. 
EB: OK. To the left is my son, Michael Billauer, his wife, Donna Billauer, and his son, Jeremy Billauer. This picture was taken, I would think, three years ago. 

INT: Where was it taken? 

EB: Here in California. 

CREW: OK. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: OK. 
EB: This picture is my husband, Richard, and Engelina Billauer. It was taken two years ago on a cruise to Alaska. 

CREW: The year? 

INT: So-- 

CREW: 1993. 

INT: 1993. 

CREW: OK. 
GEORGE BILLAUER: I'd like-- I'd like to introduce my-- my family. On the far right is my brother, Michael, my father Richard, and my mother Engelina. Being a survivor, a second generation-- 

INT: Your name? 
GEORGE BILLAUER: Oh. Being a-- we start over? [LAUGHTER] 

CREW: Go, go. 
GEORGE BILLAUER: By-- by the way, my name is George. 
MICHAEL BILLAUER: [LAUGHS] 
GEORGE BILLAUER: I'm-- I'm the older brother here. And as the second generation survivor, I-- I must admit that in-- in our-- in my growing up, it-- although we were certainly aware of my parents' background and-- and history when they were younger-- it really wasn't an issue that was widely discussed or-- or widely brought up, or-- or used as-- as an excuse or-- or a reason for the way we did things. My parents were always very concerned about our communications in our relationship. They were there for all of our activities. And when I say all, I mean all. And that loving support-- I recognize that as that's just what I expected from parents. I didn't really relate it to parents who had been through the terrible things they had been through. And I think they-- they've passed those abilities and those characteristics onto my brother and I. And again, we've adopted them, not because we felt that it was carrying on for being a second generation survivor. It was just what we were taught was the right thing to do for parents. And that's the way we've related our children. And I think if you had their grandchildren here too, you'd recognize that our relationship with them is very much what theirs was with us. And-- and so I don't really relate it to what they went through as-- as children. Although I think that certainly gives us an appreciation for-- for having parents, and still having our parents, considering what they went through. But I think the bottom line is, that-- that they were good people before that experience, and they continued to be good people after that experience. And they didn't allow that to take away from their responsibilities and their desires to be good parents and never used it as a crutch or a, as I say, as an excuse. And so I feel that my childhood wouldn't have been any different had they been through what they had been through. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 
MICHAEL BILLAUER: Yeah. I would have to say that my brother has summed up very well our-- our relationship growing up. I would-- I do think that my parents have made our family very tight. And as my brother said, any activities that we were involved in, my parents were always there. But that-- and that has translated into my brother and I, our relationship. We work together all the time. And my parents work for us now, which is kind of interesting. Because when we were little, we used to work for them. And now that we're older, they work for us. And it's-- we're-- we're together very much of the time. It's always-- it's great. And that has translated into relationships that I have with my wife and my brother has with his, and our children. And it's wonderful. My parents were great role models for being parents-- very loving, and always-- never afraid to show love. I know that there are many-- many fathers and sons who are afraid to kiss or to hug in public. And we never-- we always do it. And it's never-- we never even think about it being unusual. That's just the way it is. And it's-- that transpires to my brother and his boys and to myself and my son. And it's never-- has any connotation, or, oh, dad. Don't do that in front of everybody. It's-- it's just never been that way. It's always-- and my-- the grandsons do the same with-- with the grandparents. Even if we're out on a soccer field or something like that, it's always a big hug and a kiss. As far as-- my dad was a hard worker, and I think that has translated into his sons being hard workers. And like I said before, my mother was-- we were always together working. And one great thing about it was my parents felt so-- it felt the family was so important, that work, when they were younger, was at home. They worked at home. So whenever we came home from school, they were there. They were always there for us. And now they are still there for us. 

CREW: Speaking of. 

INT: When you were growing up, were a lot of your friends' parents survivors of the Holocaust? 
MICHAEL BILLAUER: Were a lot of our friends? No. I don't think-- I think most of my school friends were not. I was the only one. Family friends-- there were quite a few. So there were some. It was like having two groups of friends. There was one group of friends that was not familiar with it at all and other-- others, you know, like on Friday nights or when we got together for holidays, then those were always friends who were second generation. So it was like two separate kinds of friends and having different kind of relationships. 

INT: Thank you very much for today. We appreciate your time. You are a lovely family, a handsome family, and a happy family. And it's nice to meet all of you. 
MICHAEL BILLAUER: Thank you 

EB: Thank you. 
GEORGE BILLAUER: Thank you. 
RICHARD BILLAUER: Thank you. 

