INT: OK. Good afternoon. 

EB: Good afternoon. 

INT: Would you please tell us your name, your date of birth, and where you were born? 

EB: My name is Richard Billauer. And I was born January 1, 1925, in Warsaw, Poland. 

INT: Mr. Billauer, your father was Israel Julian Billauer. 

EB: That's right. 

INT: And your mother was Malka Reichert. R-E-I-C-H-E-R-T. 

EB: C-H. 

INT: C-H. 

EB: Yes. 

INT: E-R-T. I'm sorry. Would you please tell us about your mother and father as you remember them? 

EB: Let's start with my mother. My mother I do not remember too well, because she-- I left my home from Warsaw, and she was sick at that time. And she passed away in 1942, still in ghetto, one month before my father and my brother were deported. What I remember about my mother, she was a pretty lady, not because I say so, but other people said so. And she was always working. She managed a store, or owned a store, a jewelry store, on Marshall Kostka in Warsaw. And we only spent time with my mother and father on the weekends, mostly only Sunday, because Saturday, sometimes, they worked, too. And during vacation times we used to go near Warsaw to [NON-ENGLISH], which was a pretty little town. And we spent-- we, with my brother, stayed there for a couple of months. My parents came for weekends or sometimes for a couple of weeks. As I remember, my mother was not well. I believe she had cancer, and so she spent a lot of time in hospitals. And-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] She used to go to Marienbad and Carlsbad for cures. My father, thank God, survived, and just passed away last July. He was 95 years old when he passed away. But also, after the war, we spent some time together in Lubeck, where I came after the war. And then, they moved to Israel, with his second wife. He remarried in 1948. And they went to Israel. And so, since after the war, we spent just couple of months here on a visit, couple of months in Israel, or, later on, in Australia where they moved. 

INT: And how old were you when you left Warsaw? 

EB: When I left Warsaw, I was-- that was '39-- about 14, 15 years old. 

INT: You were 14 or 15 years old? And where did you go? 

EB: I left Warsaw November 15, 1939. My father decided that I should leave Warsaw. He was afraid that the, the German might, might kidnap me, because he had two jewelry stores. So they-- he was afraid. So-- and he sent me away with my cousins, two cousins, to Bialystok. We had to, of course, go through the border between Russia and Germany, which was not far away from Bialystok. We went by horse and buggy, and we had very few things with us. The only-- I remember, my father was in the jewelry business, so he gave me a box of his watches, which later on, I was selling in Bialystok, to the Russians. And this way, I can support myself. I was in Bialystok a few months when the Russian decided that they, they declared that whoever wants to go back to Warsaw is free to do so. And they-- of course, we had to sign papers. 

INT: You were living as a Jew. You weren't concealing your identity at the time, right? 

EB: No, no, no, no. I was-- I was a Jew. 

INT: OK. 

EB: They've allowed Jews who escaped Warsaw or, or the Germans to go back, if they wanted to. They said so. However, only one train, they allowed one train to go back to Warsaw. I asked my parents, by writing, by, by messengers-- not special, people who were going back and forth-- what should I do? Should I go back, or should I stay? They said I should come back. So I declared. And OK. I'm willing to go back. But as I mentioned before, only one, one train went back. And all the others they surrounded. They took us to a school. From one day to another, without, without telling us what's going to happen. They told us to come with our small things to the school, and then they shipped us to Russia. 

INT: So from Bialystok you went on a train. You wanted to go back to Warsaw. You went back-- you did go back to Warsaw? 

EB: No, no, no. 

INT: Or you never got to Warsaw? 

EB: No, no, no. They only sent one train with people to Warsaw. All the others, they shipped to-- whoever wanted to go back to Russia-- to, to Warsaw, they didn't trust us. So they all shipped us to Russia. 

INT: Where in Russia? 

EB: Now, they took us-- it was a train to Arkhangelsk. Arkhangelsk Oblast. 

INT: Could you spell that, possibly? 

EB: No. [LAUGHTER] I won't try. Arkhangelsk Oblast [INAUDIBLE]. 

INT: Oh, got it. 

EB: That was-- that was-- first, they took us three weeks by train. Of course, that was not first, not second, not even fourth class. It was, how do you call it? 

INT: A cattle car. 

EB: A cattle, cattle train. 

INT: And you had no idea where you were going at this point? 

EB: No. We didn't have no idea what to-- where we are going. I only remember, I took one piece of-- one loaf of bread and a quarter of vodka on the train. And that had to last for a while. We stop at-- we had stopped at many times, but which I remember one stop was at Minsk. And we saw a lot of Russian Jews. They were looking at us, and say, oh, we're so sorry. Who knows where, where, where do they take you? And, took us, as I said, three weeks. Till one stop, the last stop, so to speak, where at the station, where maybe, I don't know exactly, but maybe 10 trains with other people, with from, from Poland, from the Russian part of Poland. And that, of course, we mingled around to talk. [BACKGROUND NOISE] What's going to-- what's going to be? And I met my cousin and his wife. He didn't know that I was there, and I didn't know that he was there. And from there, they took us by trucks, took us in the woods separately. They distribute for-- 500 people here, 500 people to another places. There was about, I would say about 500 people together in one camp. 

INT: Before you got back on the truck, and you had stopped in Minsk, how long were you there for, before-- 

EB: No, no, no. In Minsk was only on the way. 

INT: I'm sorry. The last stop that you made before you -- 

EB: In Arkhangelsk. Yes. 

INT: OK. How long were you there? How long did you stay before they put you on the truck? 

EB: Maybe 24, 48 hours. 

INT: And, and while you were on the train the whole time, not knowing where you were going, what were your thoughts? What did you think about at night? I mean, you had no food. You were hungry. 

EB: We were hungry. We didn't-- we were worrying where they're going to take us because we didn't realize that that will save our lives. Because with this way, we didn't go to German camps. And-- 

INT: But you were aware, at that time, of, of the camps. You knew-- 

EB: No. 

INT: You didn't? 

EB: No. This was only in maybe May, June of 1940. 

INT: Oh, OK. 

EB: So at that time, nobody knew about the camps. 

INT: Right. But What were your thoughts about the fact that you had to leave? I mean, that the world was so crazy, you know, you had to leave your home-- 

INT: But-- 

EB: At such a young age? 

EB: I was 14, 15. What do I knew about anything? I-- they took us there in the woods and in the big barracks, with about 50 or 60 people together. And we had to go to work. So we didn't worry about what's-- what's doing outside of this barrack. Outside of this camp. 

INT: And you were with your cousins still at this time? 

EB: No. My cousins went to another-- to another place, in another camp. Where the camp was, I said, about few hundred people. There were three soldiers and one officer, and they were taking care of the whole camp. And we had to go every day to work in the woods, cutting woods, and didn't-- we get our 800 grams of bread, and some fish soup, and that, that, that was it. However, my parents-- I don't know how, but they sent to me three packages, which helped a lot because I could trade some shoes and boots, and some other stuff for food. And this helped a lot. At that camp, I don't remember exactly how long we were there. There, there was no attempt to escape, because it was-- the nearest village or nearest town was probably a hundred of kilometers or miles away, and through woods. Nobody even tried. 19-- I don't know exactly the year, but just when the war started between the Russian and the German, which was I think '41, they took us out of the camp. And by trains, they send us on the way to Asia, to Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan. On the way, I remember, I got sick. I got typhoid fever. So they took me off the train, and I stayed in a hospital in Saratov, quite a big city in Russia, not far from Stalingrad, which was the very famous. I was in the hospital about three or four weeks. And after that, they put me in another transport, which was going to Asia, to Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan. I was in Tashkent for a couple of days, and then they shipped us to, to Kazakhstan. Tashkent is in Uzbekistan. They shipped us to Kazakhstan, few hundred miles away. The name of the town was Leger L-E-G-E-R. That was a small town where they were looking for oil. And then we worked there on the-- in the-- [INAUDIBLE]. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] Looking for oil? Drilling for oil. But I was there for a couple of months, and they send us to a [NON-ENGLISH], not kibbutz, which is sort of a kibbutz. 

INT: How do you say that? 

EB: [NON-ENGLISH] . 

INT: [NON-ENGLISH] . 

EB: I don't know how-- that's-- there we worked in the fields. And there was better because whatever we could-- you know, whatever it was in, in, the [NON-ENGLISH]. whatever they sold-- food, fruit, or whatever-- we could, of course, eat. So there was no shortage of food there. We stayed there for a few years and we were-- when the war was over, 1945, of course they asked us, if you want to become Russian citizen, or rather not? So of course, we decided not to. And in 1946, in May-- in April, they let us go back to Poland. 

INT: How did you get back to Poland? 

EB: Oh, they, they, they-- the same way I came to Russian. [LAUGHS] Only the train was a little better. And I arrived in Poland in the beginning of May. I arrived in Posen, in Poland. From there, I went, of course, to Warsaw, to see what's doing. 

INT: And-- 

EB: I didn't-- yeah? 

INT: I'm sorry. What-- had you had any news of your parents and your brother Adam during this whole time? 

EB: Through the whole time, I received a few letters from Israel, where I had a big family, my uncles and aunts. And through them, I, I had news from my father and my brother. And they survived. My father was in Auschwitz, and then from Auschwitz, they took him to Sachsenhausen, because he was a watchmaker. And Sachsenhausen, they needed watchmakers to repair their watches and clocks. And my brother survived Auschwitz. It was lucky. 

INT: And he was with your father the whole time? 

EB: No. 

INT: No? 

EB: He was-- and as a matter of fact, I talked to him some time and he said that if you-- if my father wouldn't leave him, if they would be together, they probably both wouldn't survive. 

INT: Why? 

EB: Because, you know, one would, would try to help the other, and two is harder than one. One could somehow-- he was a young boy. So he, he's-- he mentioned to me last year that it was better for him. And [INAUDIBLE]. 

INT: I'd like to go back a little bit, before, before you talk about the end of the war. I'd like to know more about your childhood, before you left Warsaw. I'd like to know what schools you  went to. 

EB: I went to a private school, to a gymnasium. The name was [NON-ENGLISH]. And my parents had-- they have two jewelry stores, so they can afford to send me to a private school. I had many Jewish and non-Jewish friends, until 1936. Then it started, the Anti-Semitism. And so I had more connection with my Jewish friends. 

INT: Do you remember your first anti-Semitic attack, situation? 

EB: What I remembered was in Warsaw was a street where there was many bookstores. And at one time, when I-- I don't know exactly when-- they started picketing, so to speak, Jewish bookstores. I don't know exactly why it was that. In school, actually I did not-- even though it was not a Jewish gymnasium, it was a Polish gymnasium. There were about 25% Jews. I didn't have any anti-Semitism encounters there. 

INT: And your, your non-Jewish friends remained your friends at the time? 

EB: You see, I, I left Warsaw. The war started on September the 1st, and I left November 15. I-- after the war started, I didn't have any connection with my friends. 

INT: OK. 

EB: Where do we go from here? [LAUGHS] 

INT: Were you a religious family? [SIGHS] 

EB: Religious-- not, not-- I know that my father went to schul or Shabbos, but not specially. No. 

INT: So mostly on the Jewish holidays? 

EB: Usually Jewish holidays, yes. But otherwise not. 

INT: And-- [CLEARS THROAT] --did you have a large family in Warsaw? 

EB: Yes. We had a very large family. My mother had 12 sister and brothers. My father had only a sister and one brother, but I had many cousins, and, and I'm sorry to say that only my two uncles who left for Israel-- to Palestine, and their families survive. All others did not survive. 

INT: Your mother's family. 

EB: No. 

INT: Perished. Do you remember large family gatherings with your cousins and your aunts and uncles? 

EB: Yes, I do remember at my grandfather's house, which was on [NON-ENGLISH], which was in a Jewish neighborhood. Usually yom tov time we can come together. Otherwise, because the family was so big, we rather visited each uncle or aunt separately. 

INT: Are there any special occasions that stand out in your mind? Birthdays? 

EB: No. Not particularly. No. Any, any Jewish holidays, we would be together. Mostly it was my mother's family. My father's parents. My, my grandma from my father's side I don't remember at all. My grandfather passed away when I was two years old. From my mother's side, the grandfather was still alive when the war started. As a matter of fact, our house was bombed, right away in the beginning of the war, on September 3rd. And we lost everything, and we moved to my grandfather and stayed there for a few weeks. 

INT: Can you tell us about your brother Adam? We know a little bit about him, what do you remember about time spent with Adam? 

EB: My brother, Adam? We-- he was, of course, six, six year-- he was six years younger than I was. So I didn't spend too much time with him. I was always busy with my friends. And as a matter of fact, I don't-- from the childhood, I don't remember too much about our relationship. And the one, one thing I remember, one day he has a little car toy, was a-- was a glass-- was a convertible with a piece of glass as a, as a front window. I don't know what happened, but he sat on it. And, of course, he cut himself. This one accident I remember vividly. He survived. He lives is Israel. And he has two children and three grandchildren. And we see each other at least once a year, I would say. We go to Israel. Or sometimes they come and visit. Anything else? 

INT: Oh, yes. [LAUGHTER] OK. You started to talk about your life after you were liberated. 

EB: Oh. That was good. 

INT: OK. So tell us now, what day were you liberated? Do you remember the exact date? 

EB: I don't-- no. I don't know exactly. I remember on May the 1st, we stopped, because May 1st is a holiday in Russia. We stopped in a station at Kiev. We stayed there for 24 hours because of the holiday. From there, as I mentioned before, we went to Posen. I went to-- from there, to Warsaw. I spent two or three days there. I didn't find anything. I look for-- of course, our house was burned, as I said. But I went to see our-- the stores we used to have. One survived, was there. But, of course, nothing. The other one was also burned down. From there, I went to Waldenburg, in Silesia. I went on a train. I never, never forget this trip, because I had to go on, on the top of the train because it was full of passengers. Everybody was going. And then not too many trains. So I had to go on top of the train. And every time a bridge came, there was screaming, down, so we had to come down. I, I spent in Waldenburg a few months. I had mail from Israel that my father survived, and he is in Lubeck, in Germany. And my brother also was there, so I decided to, to go. 

INT: How did you find out they had survived? 

EB: Through Israel. Through my uncles. They wrote to them, and this, this way I found out. So I left Waldenburg. And [NON-ENGLISH] they took us to Czechoslovakia and Austria, and then to Munich, Germany, and to Lubeck. There I met my father, was already had another jewelry store there. He started right away, a normal life. 

INT: This was in 1946? 

EB: That was 1946 And one day I was in in the store, and two young lady came in. One of them, this is my wife. [LAUGHTER] I saw her-- 

INT: What happened when you saw her? [LAUGHTER] 

EB: I don't know what happened, but something clicked. [LAUGHTER] And that's it. And now we are just celebrated our 45th wedding anniversary. 

INT: That's wonderful. Let's, let's go back 45 years in between. 

EB: OK. 

INT: You met-- you met your wife. 

EB: Met my wife. My father, 1948, he moved to Israel with, with his-- with his wife, second wife. They married 1947. They went to Israel. And in 1949, end of '49, we decided to visit them with my fiancee. And when we were in Israel, my father had said, OK, I don't know if you are going to come to Israel or go maybe to America, and get married, and-- 

INT: OK. I'm going to stop it. 
INT: '49 your father-- 

EB: 1949 When we went to Tel Aviv, and of course, at that time, I had still a big [INAUDIBLE] there, a lot of uncles and aunts, which we met, and I didn't see since-- since before the war. And I didn't see my brother for quite a few years. He-- he was in Lubeck together with my father, and then he decided to go to Israel. However, because he was a young man, they did not provide for him a certificate. So he decided to go with the Briha, illegal. And he went. And he came to Israel successfully. And first he was working in a kibbutz, not kolkhoz, but kibbutz, [LAUGHTER] I believe, a year or two. And then he started to work for the telephone company, where he was working since then till he retired last year. 

INT: Last year at 95? 

EB: No, no, no, my brother. 

INT: I'm sorry. 

EB: We were in Israel at that time about-- with-- with Engelina for about two months. Then we got married. And we stayed there another month, and we went back to Lubeck, where we applied for our papers to America. And we came here in June of '51. 

INT: And your first son George was born. 

EB: He was born in Germany. And he was six weeks old when we came here. We came by plane because-- because of him. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we arrived in New York, and we had some friends there. Actually, our papers said to-- to go to Stockton, California. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I-- being in Lubeck, I started to learn watchmaking as my father was also. So they had a job for me in Stockton. However, our friends said, no, why are you going to go so far to California? There you have no friends. Stay here. So we stayed in New York, and I worked as a watchmaker in New York, and I had another son. 

INT: Michael? 

EB: Michael. And we were quite successful in working. I was working. My wife was working. We sent our sons to college, chiropractic school. We did well. 

INT: Let's go back a few years. I-- I think it would be interesting to hear about your years in Russia from your first-- from your first stop until you left. I know you were in a few different camps working. Would you talk more about that? 

EB: In the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [INAUDIBLE], we had to work hard. The summers were very hot, and the winter was very cold. The temperature was, in the wintertime, 50 minus and below. And there was no picnic. There was no day off, even if the temperature would be minus 50, they'd still let us go. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they did not feed us very well. As I mentioned before, 800 gram of bread per day. And that was a small piece because the bread was very heavy, more water than anything else. The only thing it was that we didn't fear for our lives. 

INT: You didn't fear for your lives? 

EB: No. 

INT: Why? 

EB: Because we worked. They wanted us to work, not like in-- in-- in Germany, they took people to concentration camps. This was more a working camp, no-- no death threatening. 

INT: What did you-- did you ever think, is there a God? Why is this happening to us? 

EB: We didn't have time for that because we worked for 12-- 12 hours a day. And when we went to the barracks, we were looking for something to eat and were tired and happy to go to-- to sleep. 

INT: When you-- when you went into the barracks and you were tired, but did you talk among-- talk among yourselves about your lives before you ended up in this camp? About your families, did you all talk about your families? 

EB: I don't think that we-- we were so busy with the daily life that anything what was previously we did not think about it. Even so, I-- of course, I got some letters from my parents, from my father. And-- but they were only few and far between. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] 

INT: Did you ever think about if I get out of here or when I get out of here, I'm going to tell the world? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] 

EB: I might have, but I-- I don't remember. And as a matter of fact, a lot of thing I do not remember. I don't know why. It's like a blackout. I know that we had very hard times there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But many things I've forgotten. 

INT: It's painful. 

EB: Probably that why-- that why. That was-- it was not-- not a picnic. Even so, in-- in-- in kolkhoz, when we worked, it was much easier than-- than in-- in the-- in the first camp in [INAUDIBLE] because the-- the weather was different. There was not-- the-- the winters were terrible. 

INT: How long were you in the first camp for? 

EB: In the first camp, we were till-- till 1941. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 

INT: And in 1941, you went to the kolkhoz. 

EB: Kolkhoz, yes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Actually, first we were in a little town when I-- in Lenger when we were working on a oil expedition, but there, we were only few months. Also, we had problems with food and supplies, not only-- not only because we were-- because at that time, we were free already, not only-- everybody had that problem. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Today, you-- you might have gotten [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] half a pound of sugar and that was good maybe for six months because the deliveries didn't come or somebody sold it on the black market. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Any other questions? [LAUGHS] 

INT: Yeah, would you tell us more about kolkhoz, and your-- your daily activities, what you did? 

EB: In the-- in the kolkhoz, we worked in the fields. And also between 10 and 12 hours a day. We had to provide for ourselves, to cook for ourselves. But what did we cook? Some fish soup, as I mentioned before, and-- and we baked our own bread. It was actually like the pita. We baked it on a small-- we had small ovens. We had to prepare ourselves and bake ourselves but at least we had it. Bread was no problem. 

INT: About how many people in kolkhoz? How big was this camp? 

EB: Kolkhoz, this was Cossack-- Cossacks kolkhoz. They used to have a Russian kolkhoz and Cossacks kolkhoz. They put us in a Cossacks kolkhoz. And there were about 50 of Jewish people, but the kolkhoz itself was Cossack, which the-- the people are Muslims, so they have also some Jewish customs like no eating pork or something like that. They were pretty good to us. There were no-- no anti-Semitic incidents. The only thing I remember-- they used to say first when we came, Jews [NON ENGLISH SPEECH]. Its means Jews-- Jews eat people. 

INT: Jews eat people? 

EB: They didn't know. They didn't know about Jews at all. They didn't know what-- somebody told them the-- the Jews eat people. But of course, they saw that we're as normal as they are. 

INT: And did you-- did you work? Did-- did only the 50 Jews work together or you-- you mixed with everybody? 

EB: No, no, we mix everybody. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We had our small rooms with-- with the Cossacks and everybody was working. Some were working in the field, some were working in the kitchen or whatever was needed. 

INT: Now I'm-- what I don't know is why would the Cossacks-- I mean, were they prisoners? [INTERPOSING VOICES] 

EB: No, no, no, no, no. 

INT: --this was a-- OK, they were-- OK. 

EB: There's-- there's no prisoners. No, no. This is-- They were on their own field, in their own kolkhoz. And they just divided 50 people in one kolkhoz, 50 people or 100 people in another one. But mostly-- mostly in Cossacks. There were some Russian kolkhoz too, but they did not send us to those. 

INT: Where did you go after kolkhoz. Where was your next stop? 

EB: Next stop was liberation. 

INT: Oh, so you were there for about four years, then, right? From '41 to '45? 

EB: Yeah, between-- between-- between the camp-- and I was a couple of months in-- in Lenger where we looked for oil. And the rest I was in a-- a kolkhoz till the liberation. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] 

INT: What are some of your thoughts 50 years later? 

EB: Well, the-- the one thought I have is America, America the great-- the great America. [LAUGHS] We always [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] thinking about America. But if somebody-- if somebody was in Russia, then he can appreciate even more what the United States means. I wish every-- every American, born American, would go for, even now-- and not even to Russia-- to any place in the world-- and then come back, and we wouldn't have so much trouble with gangs and other stupidities. 

INT: Do you believe in God? 

EB: Do I believe in God? I suppose so, yes. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] You know, I-- I don't know if too many people believe-- too many survivors do believe. I-- I-- I think I do. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 

INT: Is there anything you would like to add about your experiences that-- that you haven't said yet? 

EB: I don't think-- I-- I am glad that I am here in America and I will survive. And I have a nice family, and I'm very happy. I hope it will last forever. 

INT: And is that your message for your-- for your children and your grandchildren and the rest of the world, or--? 

EB: My message? My message is they-- they should stop bickering and fighting and-- and think about peace, especially in Israel. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] 

INT: Do you have some pictures that you would like to share with us? 

EB: Oh, yes, I have. This-- this picture was taken in 1920s, I believe 1924, '25. The bearded man is my grandfather-- my mother's father, Abraham Reichert And this 1, 2, 3, 4, 5-- his sons. On the left, far left side, is my mother. On the right far side is my aunt. 

INT: And where was it taken? 

EB: It was taken in Warsaw. 

INT: In Warsaw. 

EB: It was-- my-- one of my uncles passed away, so they were at the cemetery. This is my-- picture of my father, mother, and brother. My father, Julian Billauer, my mother, Marka Billauer, and my brother, Adam Billauer. This picture was taken in 1941 in Warsaw, and I got it sent to Russia. I treasure this picture because that's the only picture that was taken during the war. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This cute boy is myself. I was there about a year, or a year and a half, and of course, you know my name is Richard Billauer. 

INT: And where was it taken? 

EB: This was taken in a photographer's place. 

INT: In Warsaw? 

EB: In Warsaw, yes. This picture was taken in [INAUDIBLE] on vacation time. Down the left is my mother, Malka Billauer, and on the right is my uncle Moishe Reichert. Who is the school cap? It's Richard Billauer. It's myself. And the little boy is my brother. We spent there our summertime. 

INT: And-- 

EB: And I don't remember the year. Must be 1932 or '3. 

INT: In Warsaw? 

EB: No. 

INT: In the summer? 

EB: In the summer home. 

INT: OK. 

EB: This is our wedding picture. And my wife, Engelina Billauer and myself, Richard Billauer. This was in 1950 in Israel. In Tel Aviv, Israel. This picture was taken in Germany. In Lubeck, Germany, in 1946. This is my father, [? Julian ?] Billauer, and myself, Richard Billauer. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yes. This picture was taken two years ago at-- what is it-- 1953? 

INT: 1993. 

EB: 1993, Yes. On a cruise to Alaska, this is my beloved wife, Angelina, and myself, Richard Billauer. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This little guy is my youngest grandson, Jeremy Billauer. He is son of Michael Billauer. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is Jessie Billauer and Josh Billauer, both sons of my son, George Billauer. On the left you see my little son Michael, and this is George Billauer. And next to him am I, Richard Billauer. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 

INT: And it was taken in what year? 

EB: It was taken just last Thanksgiving, Thanksgiving 1994. This is my son, Michael Billauer. This is his wife, Donna Billauer, and their little son Jeremy. This picture was taken a couple of years ago, I suppose 1993. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This picture was taken in 1994 in Pacific Palisades. This is my son, George Billauer, with his wife, [? Cecil ?] Billauer and two sons, Josh and Jessie Billauer. 

CREW: OK. 
EB: I don't remember her name-- I mean the first name. 

CREW: Who is this? 

INT: My grandmother-- my mother's mother. 

CREW: It's your grandmother? 
EB: Yeah, 

INT: Which grandmother? 

EB: Grandmother Reichert. [PAUSES FOR 13 SECONDS] I say-- no. What do you mean? 1800 she was born. The picture wasn't taken-- [LAUGHTER] 

