Ode To The Genius Of The Lakes.
By William Cockin[ Price two Shillings.]
Ode To The Genius Of The Lakes In The North Of England.
Ye smiling band Of youths and virgins, who through all the maze Of young desire with rival leaps pursue This charm of beauty; if the pleasing toil Can yield a moment's respite, hither turn Your favourable ear, and trust my words.
Pleasures of the Imagination, B. I. London: Printed for the Author; And sold by Richardson and Urquhart, under the Royal Exchange; J. Robson, New Bond Street; and W. Pennington, Kendal.
1780.
Advertisement.
How the following Ode came to be written is not here needful to say: But being written, and the author concurring in opinion with some of his friends, that it might yield an innocent amusement to the votaries of a fashionable and innocent object, he consented to have it published.
Moved simply by this hope, he throws the piece only into the way of actual tourists.
And through he is not insensible of the pleasure of being found a successful admirer of the muses, yet his disclaims the idea of offering it to the public as a literary production.
If he can manage his subject so as to make it entertaining, he will have gained an end held too valuable by his feelings to allow of any regrets for the loss of superior praise.
Ode To The Genius Of The Lakes Gray, Young, Pennant and Hutchinson, describe a part of the Lakes and their accompaniments mentioned in this poem; but the most complete and circumstantial account of them may be seen in the new edition of the Guide To The Lakes just published I. Hail, O thou!
whose rising fame Unusual progress makes; Thou, whom Fancy hence shall name The Genius of the lakes; The Muse, who ever loves to trace Whatever is fair on Nature's face, And see, though long with clouds overcast, Neglected worth shine forth at last, And simple taste and truth prevail Greets thee well, and bids the hail!
And if the strain may interpose Aught formed to sooth, or gently close One beauteous effort of thy skill, Let the Muse her aim fulfil Let her unfold, drawn from the dorian lyre, What thy bright sylvan groves, and varying fate inspire.
Ii.
Long ere these happier days of genuine taste, Which give thy magic scenes encomium due Through many an age, with like enchanted graced, Thy rills keep tinkling, and thy thickets grew; Yet this was felt by few: Unconscious of their matchless charms, Unskilled in scenic art, And how refined perception warms Whatever can touch the heart Then save the joy which general nature yields, The swain with fervour flight surveyed thy beauteous fields.
Iii.
Still, however without regret, Thou would ply thy plastic skill; Toil but seems an easy debt, When fancy has its will.
To form thy watery rounds complete, By prototypes supremely neat, And give them what might challenge fame Though never bestowed, was all thy aim: Content, the while with self-applause, Beauty's charms, and soft repose.
Thus innate worth still acts her part, The best spectator her own heart; And thus, though over the sylvan green," Full many a flowret blush unseen," Yet oft these blooms, once noticed, have been found, The pride of Flora's host, and through the world renowned.
Iv.
And now, when bright thy day of honour dawns, Which quells the darksome shades of many a year, What wondering crouds, to trace thy fairy lawns, At Summer's call, in gayest trim appear!
Sure this is praise sincere!
See over thy rocks, along thy glades, They rove with raptured eye; Now mark thy rills and bold cascades, Or scale some mountain high; Inspired by Taste, to Nature's interests true, They deem all labour light, which brings thy charms to view.
V. Yearly honours such as these Must gratitude inspire; Thou, whose pleasure is to please, I know wilt feel its fire.
And, O when, its sickness pale, Some virgin seeks thy balmy gale Or hopeless, cheerless lover sees His vigour waste by slow degrees, While Nature in the dim sunk eye Bids Art its speediest help apply; Then thy breezes wing with health:-- To chear their minds, as if by stealth, They footing pictures interpose, And hide Remembrance from its woes!
So shall assiduous Fame with joy relate, Around they realms so gay, health's fairest pleasures wait.
Vi.
See, from the hills soft onward to the plains, Streams white with foam down rocky channels leap, Till joined the lake, some fretful speed remains But there, at once, they all in quiet sleep.
Peace smiles upon the deep!
So, many a train of busy cares, Which hurt the human mind, In Taste's fair bosom, unawares, A soft oblivion find; With gentlest lapse Life's mingled water glide, And fair reflected skies still gild the placid tide.
Vii.
Twilight now has over each scene Her dubious shadows thrown, Straight the sportive says convene To gambol on the lawn.
By dew-brushed footsteps, round and round, Still their pranks the next morn are found; And oft some glimpse of real array Daunts the lone shepherd on his way.
Ha!
heard ye not from Bowdar Stone The spell-fixt ghost its fate bemoan And clearer still( born on the breeze Which waves those dank over-hanging trees, As ever tost from steep to steep) Lawdore's tormented spirit weep; While, fired with rage on Skiddaw's clouded head, Daemons of awful might display their thundering tread?
Viii.
Tales such as these, which minds uncultured view As half the source of nature's mystic laws, Erst' er thy glades factitious horrours threw, Till thoughts more just with science' sun arose; And then the fabled cause, No longer mighty to alarm, But leagued with fancy gay, Gave many a note of wilder charm To deck the sylvan lay; Gave thy fair paths new topics to engage The strains of sprightlier wit, or contemplation sage.
Ix.
Now the muse, O power divine!
Upborn on bolder wing, Sees stern Winter's frowns decline; She sees returning Spring.
No more the hills are wreated with snow; The shuddering tempests cease to blow; And the soft enlivening gales Gently cheer the sprouting vales; While, to new-deck each loved domain, Though begin thy toils again; To strew the groves and meads with flowers, To hang fresh foliage over the bowers, To smooth the lakes, and, all day long, Give rapture to some linnet's song; Then softly over the extended landscape throw, The warm aethereal hues bright summer suns bestow.
X.
But small this art to the creative sway, Which scooped the beds where countless streams unite; First formed the lawns, and, round the varying bay, Scattered the oaks with arms of giant might; And what else strikes the sight: The foaming torrent head-long sent, The grey rock's ivyed face, Some cliff's tremendous, forward bent, Or grotto's dim recess Till, next, as if to guard these objects dear, The encircling mountains huge their toweering heads uprear.
Xi.
Lo!
thy wandering eye to please, Over Thurston's smooth expanse, Verged with lawns of tufted trees, The lightsome sun-beams dance.
On Windermere's long scattered isles Though Kirkston frown, fair Orrest smiles Chearful Wythop waves his woods: And round Derwent's glassy floods, With many a fringed glade between, Falcon's cliffs sublime are seen.
And hark!
to greet thy ear, remote( while nearer flows the rock-dove's note) Down Harter Hills and Swarth Fell steep, A thousand humming cataracts sweep; The eagles scream on Glaramara high, And Ulls' grand echoing sounds reverberate through the sky.
Xii.
Though Claude and Rosa join their utmost art, Though greater Brown his rich invention strain, They only prove thy views a charm impart' Tis right to copy, but to rival, vain.
Otherwise Coniston.
So fares what poets feign: The vale of Tempe, fields that smile With gay Elysian flowers, Or what might young restraint beguile In Amara's gentle bowers; These scenes of laboured fancy ill convey What fair tints and forms at evert step display.
Xiii.
Happy, sure in these retreats To ply the shepherd's trade!
( If the sweets be native sweets Then still more happy made;) At morn, as over the mountain's head Slow pacing clouds their vapours spread, Along the breezy heights to stray, While nibbling flocks roam all the way, And hear below the sky-lark's note Blyth mixing with the horn remote; [ See Paradise Lost.
B.
4. line 281.]
At noon, in some lone shady dell The legend's wonderous tales to spell Fast by the brooks; and then; at eve, If some dear Lucy but give leave, Pipe to the echos, till bright Hesper's ray Shine over the dusky hills, where sunk the god of day.
Xiv.
But happier far, when here some youthful mind, Sanguine through hope, and nature's prompt desire, With raptured eye, and fancy unconfined, Drinks the deep magic of the muse's lyre: And oft with daring fire, Himself attempts to make its strings, With thrilling tones suggest, The high-born images of things, To warm the poet's breast; That, worthy of the scenes from whence they rose, With charms of genuine grace might win deserved applause.
XV.
Grateful to each liberal glow, And truth's inspiring flame, To thy happy soil we owe Full many an honoured name.
There the pious Gilpin spent His early youth of serious bent, and Sand's and Gibson, Mills renowned, Skilled in scripture lore profound.
The various realms of classic taste Thy Aglionby and Hudson graced.
And learning's amplest stores we find, In Barlow's deep retentive mind; While, dear to science, thou may claim The highest praise from Chamners' name, And Him who had he reached a maturer age The admiring world had seen a second Newton sage.
Xvi.
Nor dumb the Muse.
To Cumbria's listening swains, Relph sweetly warbles on his ivy-leaf; Who but applauds when Tickel pours his strains, And Brown gives energy to scenic grief?
Joseph Sowerby.
See his name in the second of the following notes.
Alluding more particularly to his pastorals in the Cumberland dialect.
And ah!
what soft reprieve To the more tender throbs of care Do Langhorne's notes convey, As down the vale of Eden fair They wind their tuneful way!
And, were it meet to dwell on living fame, Still do thy studious sons high Attic honours claim.
Xvii.
Objects three the duly wise With raptured eye explore Things material, Moral ties, And Revelation's lore.
As each unfolds a world complete, Where all that's fit and comely meet, So each on each, through kindred laws And kindred charms, new light bestows; While, through the whole, no part is seen Where Beauty's footsteps have not been.
Vide his beautiful little ode to the River Eden And, O were the Taste, which now Decks with praise thy modest brow Extended to the bright domains, Where heavenly-fair Religion reigns, Then would thy scenes a happy medium prove To the first great intent of Nature's ardent love!
Xviii.
For though refined pursuits deserve applause, And genuine pleasure at each step reveal, Yet Nature never her brightest smile bestows Till holy Faith instruct us how to feel; Till from vain crowds we steal, And Virtue see a God confessed Over every atom reign, And find her own well-cultured breast A Paradise contain; And thus the fond admiring Soul prepare For Scenes of endless bliss, past utterance Good and Fair.
February, 1780.
Three Occasional Notes.
Three Occasional Notes.
Note 1.
Stanza Xii, lines 10, 11.
These scenes of laboured fancy ill convey What thy fair tints and forms at every step display.
There is no doubt but that leave for erections of this sort might easily be gained on any proper site, and that they would long be preserved almost religiously inviolate.
In Article 8th of Addenda to the new edition of The Guide to the Lakes it is recommended, as a particular that would greatly contribute to the perfection of this beautiful region, to have proper objects placed on some of the eminences with which it abounds.
The author of this piece is fully aware of the vanity ready to be attributed to every one, who on any occasion attends to dictate to the public; and yet he cannot here( with the greatest deference) take the opportunity to suggest another particular of a like kind which he fancies, may merit attention by future tourists.
What is here meant is the erection of inscribed pillars, tablets,&amp; c. by the affluent visitors, near a favourite lake or station, commemorative of some friend, person of genius,&amp; c. or of the time when they themselves enjoyed the pleasure of viewing the surrounding objects.
They might thus, in a part which gives the fairest play to genuine feeling and fancy, ether evince their regard for merit, and their love of nature, or record their friendships, and recall to the minds of posterity, that they too had visited Arcadia.
The undertaking would not only beautify these scenes, and give occasion to many a pleasing reflection, but I flatter myself, be a credit to the national taste, and in time become itself a new inducement to make a tour which must contribute to health, while it recreates with the most innocent of pleasures.
Invention would find endless hints for these erections and inscriptions; but it is submitted to those who approve of the design, whether it would not be proper, as a specimen of such commemorative ornaments, to gain with a memorial of the late Dr. Brown on the border of Derwent Water, and of Mr. Gray near the lake of Grasmere.
These lakes have received singular honour from their pens, and the world will long be amused and instructed by their more elaborate performances.
Note Ii.
Stanza XV, lines 3, 4.
To thy happy soil we owe Full many an honoured name.
The difficulty of introducing a list of names into verse is evident.
When they are numerous a part only must be selected, and whatever be the rule of preference laid down by the poet, still they may prove intractable on account of accent and quantity.
Regularity and completeness must not therefore in this case be expected.
But as the deficiency may be remedied by a note, and the author fancies a catalogue of the celebrated men, who have been born in the district of the lakes or at least in the counties of Westmorland and Cumberland, might entertain his readers, he has subjoined the following one.
This he was more especially induced to draw up, as the late historians of these two counties have not through proper to allot a distinct portion of their volumes to so agreeable a topic; not do their detached accounts enter regularly into the index.
After all, the author is conscious, that this list is imperfect, but he had not the opportunities he could have wishes to complete it.
For further and more particular satisfaction it may be necessary to observe, that those names whose characters may be found at large in the present edition of the Biographia Britannica are marked[ B.B.]
Those on the Biographical Dictionary[ B.D.]
and those in Noorthouck's Dictionary[ N.]-- An asterisx(*) is prefixed to the names that are mentioned in the verses.
Bainbridge( Christopher) Archbishop of York and Cardinal Priest of the Romish church.
The an author and accounted learned, his writings are lost and his name is chiefly remembered as an ambassador from Henry Viii.
to Pope Julius Ii.
He was born at Hilton near Appleby( West.
); when, is not certain, but he died( at Rome) in 1514.
[ B.B.-- B.D.]
In the new impression of this great work now carrying forward, there is no doubt, but the authors will find reason to improve it with many northern worthies, omitted in the first edition, or who have died since its publication; such as Seed, Shaw, Chambers, Brown, Langhorne,&amp; c.,&amp; c. Skelton( John) poet laureate to Henry Viii.
Though harsh in his satires, his other productions are allowed to discover imagination.
Neither the place not time of his birth are recorded, but his is said to be descended from the Skeltons in Cumberland.
[ Brit.
Biog] * Gilpin( Bernard) Rector of Houghton, A zealous reformer, well skilled in all the parts of learning then in esteem, and for his many christian virtues usually called The Apostle of the North.
He was born in Kentmere, near Kendal,( W.) in 1517.
[ B.B.-- B.D.-- N.] Grindal( Edmund) Archbishop of Canterbury.
A zealous confessor; a a lover of learning, and the friend of the deserving.
He founded and endowed St Bees school and was born at Hensingham near Whithaven,( Cumb.)
in 1519.
[ B.B.-- B.D.]
* Sandys( Edwin) Archbishop of York.
An active reformer, and one of the most prominent protestant preachers and divines of his time.
He was concerned in making a new translation of the bible in 1565, and in drawing up the Common Prayer and Liturgy.
He founded and endowed Hawkshead School, and was born at or near Hawkshead,( Lancash.)
in 1519.
[ B.B.-- B.D.]
-- His second son, Sir Edwin, was also famous for his learning, and the author or Europae Speculum.
His youngest son, George, gained much reputation by an elegant translation of Ovid.
[ B.D.]
Airey( Henry) provost of Queen's College, Oxford.
Author of some few learned pieces, but most remembered for his virtues.
He was born in Kentmere( W.); when, not known, but his flourished about the year 1560.
[ B.B.]
Crackenthorp( Richard) a learned man, and author of several tracts.
He was born at or near Strickland.
( W.) Entered at Oxford in 1583, and died in 1624.
[ B.B.
Note, vol.
5.p 3180] * Aglionby( John) Chaplain in ordinary to James I.
A most accomplished scholar and critic.
He had a considerable hand in the translation of the New Testament appointed by James I. in 1604.
-- He was born at Nunnery, near Kirkoswald,( C.) When, not ascertained.
[ B.B.-- N.] * Barlow( Thomas) Bishop of Lincoln.
A man of prodigious extent of learning, which he manifested in several productions.
He was born at Langill near Orton,( W.) in 1607.
[ B.B.-- B.D.-- N.] Borwick( John) Dean of St Paul's.
A learned man, and a very active and loyal friend of Charles Ii.
He left the greatest part of his fortune to a charitable uses for his native place: This was Witherslack, near Kendal.
( W.) He was born in 1612.
-- His brother Peter was an eminent physician in ordinary to Charles Ii.
[ B.B.]
Addison( Lancelot) Dean of Litchfield, and father of the celebrated Joseph Addison.
He was a man of great natural endowments, learning, and worth, and author of several valuable treatises.
He was born at Mauldismeaburn, near Appleby,( W.) in 1632.
[ B.B.-- B.D.]
* Mills( John) Chaplain in ordinary to Charles Ii.
celebrated for his most learned and beautiful edition of the Greek Testament.
He was born at Hardendale, near Shap,( W.) about the year 1645.
[ B.B.-- B.D.-- N.] Nicolson( William) Bishop of Carlisle.
A great scholar and antiquarian, which he has evinced in a multiplicity of writings.
He was born at Orton,( C.) about the year 1655.
[ B.D.-- N.] Smith( John) a divine of distinguished abilities and learning.
He was of so happy a genius, that in the 5th year of his age he had learned the Latin grammar, and the Greek in his 9th.
He was born at Lowther, near Shap,( W.) in 1659.
[ B.B.-- B.D.]
Smith( Joseph) younger brother to the preceding Dr. John Smith, was also an eminent divine, and born at Lowther.
[ B.D.]
Langbane( Gerard) a learned writer of his time.
He settles £ 24 per annum on the free-school of Barton Kirk,( W.) where he was born.
He had a son Gerard, who was also a man of parts, and an author.
[ B.D.-- N.] * Hudson( John) a critic of great learning, and a man of equal probity.
He distinguished himself to the learned abroad as well as at home, by several valuable editions of Greek and Latin authors.
He was born at Widehope, near Cockermouth,( C.) in 1662[ B.B.-- B.D.-- N.] * Gibson( Edmund) Bishop of London.
A prelate of distinguished worth, learning and vigilance: Author of several well-known tracts, and famed for his knowledge in the English ecclesiastical constitution.
He was born at Knipe, near Shap,( W) in 1669.
[ B.B.-- B.D.-- N.]-- Thomas Gibson, M.D.
the noted author of a book on Anatomy, was his uncle, and born at the same place.
[ Burn's Westm.]
* Tickell( Thomas) a poet of great and well-known merit.
His elegant productions placed him in his own time at the head of minor poets, but his genius is more admired, the more it is known.
He was born at Bridekirk, near Cockermouth,( C.).
The time of his birth is not recorded, but he died in 1740.
[ B.B.-- Note p .14 2d Sup.
v .6 th.-- B.D.-- N.] * Chambers( Ephraim) the celebrated author of the Dictionary of Arts and Sciences.
He was born at a village called Milton, near the middle of the road between Burton and Kendal( W/); when, not certain, but he died about 1740.
[ N.] Collinson( Peter) a noted and intelligent member of the Royal Society, and distinguished by his virtues as well as knowledge.
He was born at Ings, or Hugill, near Kendal,( W.) in 1693.
[ N.] Shaw( Thomas) Principal of St Edmund Hall, Regius professor of Greek at Oxford and well known to the learned world by his travels into Barbary and the Levant.
He was born at Kendal,( W.) in the year 1694.
.
[ N.] Dean is commonly mentioned as his birth place, but I believe erroneously This date is from his friends.
Noorthouck's is 1692.
Seed( Jeremiah)" A man of the most able head, and amiable heart;" author of some admirable and popular sermons.
He was born at Clifton,( W.) near Penrith, when, not ascertained, but he died in 1747.
[ B.D.]
Fothergill( George) principal of St Edmund Hall, in Oxford; author of two columns of excellent sermons, which in the Critical Review are classed with the writings of these able advocates of Christianity, Chillingworth, Hooker, and Leland.
He was born at Lockhome, in Ravenstondale,( W.) in 1705.
[ B.D.]
Dalton( John) a man of most elegant learning, exquisite wit, and amiable manners.
He adapted Milton's Masque to the stage, and was author of the poem descriptive of the vale of Keswick,&amp; c. he was born at Dean, near Cockermouth,( C.) in 1709.
[ B.D.]
* Relph( Josiah) school-master of Sebergham, author of a volume of poems, which, if not characterised by any strong marks of genius, nevertheless intitle him to a place among minor poets.
His pastorals in the Cumberland dialect have certainly great merit.
The collection is introduced with a biographical preface by the Rev.
Mr. Denton mentioned below, and everyone who reads it will allow with him, that," Relph's life and virtues( whatever his genius and writings may do deserve very well to be remembered."
-- He was born at Sebergham, near Carlisle,( C.) in 1712.
* Sowerby( Joseph) a man of most extraordinary genius and proficiency in the mathematics.
Though, in a account of his early death, and other circumstances, he has not left any works behind him to perpetuate his name, yet his uncommon abilities, and amiable manners, deserve to be recorded; and I wish this slight revival of his memory may induce some person who knows his history to draw up a regular account of his life for the inspection of the public.
Though it is from the fruit we are the most ready to praise the tree, yet promising blossoms ever deserve admiration, should they not arrive at the maturity which demands out gratitude.
That what is related of him here, and at the close of the stanza referred to, is not without foundation may be seen by the following character which was inserted in the papers and magazines of the time, and said to be drawn up by Dr. Bradley, professor of Astronomy at Oxford.
But whoever wrote it, the concluding encomium I am informed was not judged extravagant but those who knew his abilities, and his pupils that are yet alive, speak of him with an enthusiasm almost approaching veneration. "
October 12, 1740.
On Thursday last died at his lodgings in Edmonton, Mr Joseph Sowerby of Murrah, in Cumberland.
A gentleman not only of uncommon genius, but singular proficiency in mathematical learning.
Without education to improve,-- without fortune to advance,-- without friends to recommend him,-- without breeding to engage,--- without address to win,--- without eloquence to persuade, he not only deserved but procured the esteem of the most conversant in that noble and abstruse science.
But that excessive application to study, which( under all these disadvantages) brought him into the regard of the learned world, cut off, at the age of 28, a genius that wanted only time to have ripened into that of a second Newton."
To this list we may subjoin the following names( out of several others I have not opportunity to collect) which, though they have not yet been introduced to our popular biography, some of them at least will enrich it at a future period.
In the parish of Graystock.
Thomas Denton , M.A.
late Rector of Ashtead in Surry, author of the Consolations of Human Life, in Dodsley's and the House of Superstition in Pearch's Collection of Poems.
He was born at Sebergham, near Carlisle,( C.) Dr Felton, Principal of St Edmund Hall, in Oxford, author of a well-known and elegant Dissertation on the Classics, was certainly either a Cumberland or Westmorland man.
At Brough,( W.) was born William Thompson, Fellow of Queen's College, Oxford, author of the poem on Sickness in four books and other poetical pieces.
The late Dr. Joseph Brown, Provost of Queen's College Oxford, known to the leaned world by an elegant edition of Barberini's Poems, was born at Dacre, near Ulls Water,( C.) Popular fame has given Wigton, in Cumberland, the honour of the birth-place of* Dr Brown, author of the Essays on the Characteristics, the tragedies of Barbarossa, Athelstan,&amp; c. but candour obliges the writer of the foregoing lines to confess,( what he has learned since they were written) that Rothbury in Northumberland, was the real place of his nativity, though he was brought from thence to Wigton( where his father was Rector) so young as to be conveyed in a basket.
Dr. Langthorne the poet, lately deceased, was born at Winton near Kirkby Stephen,( W.) We may yet add, that Hogarth, the famous painter, was of Westmorland extraction, from a place called Kirkby Thore, and that is hugely probable, though not certain, that the great reformer Wickliff was born in one of these two counties.
Note Iii.
Stanza Xvi, lines 10, 11.
And, were it meet to dwell on living fame, Still do thy studious sons high Attic honours claim.
A properly informed mind, I should think, would always experience a peculiar difficulty in publicly touching upon the characters of men; especially of those that are living.
The present licentious state of the press has, however, in a good measure destroyed this delicacy, and the self-interested tourist( as well as the factious politician) now finds his account, more in retailing personal anecdotes, and giving glimpses( however partial and imperfect) at living character, than in avowed purport of his title-page.
When this practice terminates in censure, there is certainly something cruel in it, and when in praise, though well meant and morally right, it may nevertheless for many reasons give pain to the object.
Partly from these consideration the author here foregoes a tempting opportunity to introduce a few pages into his work, which would stand a great chance, merely of themselves, to recommend the rest to public notice.
For there are several men now living, born in the neighbourhood of the lakes, that for strength of genius, depth of learning, proficiency in arts, elegance of taste, and rectitude of understanding, are an ornament to their age and nation.
Still however he declines being particular: He is afraid of hurting the delicacy of some with the manner of notice, and offending all with the insignificance of the vehicle.
Finis.
